



Targeting Domestic Violence Center To Help Victims
John Laidler, Globe Correspondent
SALEM - It's a traumatic prospect for any domestic violence
victim: having to do battle with her batterer in court. But the
ordeal is even more difficult for victims who can't afford a
lawyer.
Soon a new resource will be available in Essex County to expand
legal help to victims who find themselves in that predicament.
Set to open Jan. 22, the Essex County Family Legal Aid Center
will provide free legal assistance to low-income domestic violence
victims in civil court. The center will be close to the Essex
Probate and Family Court, where many matters involving domestic
violence victims, from restraining order applications to child
custody disputes, are heard.
Advocates for domestic violence victims say the new center,
funded with a $303,000 federal grant, will be an important step
toward getting people the legal help they need.
"We're thrilled," said Ross Dolloff, executive director of
Neighborhood Legal Services, a Lynn-based agency that will run the
office in collaboration with Lowell-based Merrimack Valley Legal
Services.
The two agencies provide free legal representation to low-income
people, including domestic violence victims, in civil matters. But
Dolloff said there is a "huge need" for the services, and the new
center will "get us much further along in terms of our ability to
serve that need."
The grant will pay the salaries of two lawyers and an intake
specialist for 18 months at the center, which will operate out of
rented space in Salem's old Masonic building at 70 Washington St.
Center organizers hope to obtain more funds to extend the
program.
In addition to expanding the amount of legal help available, the
center, because of its location near the Probate Court, will allow
for that help to be more readily accessible. Merrimack Valley Legal
Services, which has an office in Lawrence, is convenient for people
with cases in the Essex County Probate Court division in that city.
And both Merrimack and Neighborhood are near district courts. But
neither has an office in Salem.
"Salem . . . is really developing into the chief probate court
for the county, so it's very, very critical that we have a presence
there," said Kenneth MacIver, director of Merrimack Valley Legal
Services. "It's just going to serve our clients a whole lot
better."
Dolloff said that because the center will be just up the street
from the court, it will be easy for Probate Court staff to refer
people to it.
The center is also designed to improve coordination among the
two legal service groups and agencies in the region that provide
counseling and other non-legal services to victims of domestic
violence.
Six of those agencies teamed up with the two legal service
groups to apply for the grant: Help for Abused Women and their
Children, based in Salem; the Women's Resource Center in Lawrence;
the Newburyport Crisis Center; Action Inc., in Gloucester;
Alternative House, based in Lowell; and North Shore Community
Action Program, based in Peabody. The money was awarded through the
US Justice Department's Violence Against Women office.
"It really brings together for the first time all the people who
do work for victims of domestic violence in a single project. So
it's quite exciting," MacIver said.
Dolloff said the two attorneys staffing the center, Patricia A.
Levesh and Vita Palazzolo, will work closely with the domestic
violence service organizations. He said that would allow for easier
referral from those agencies of victims needing legal help, but
also referral by the center of clients who need counseling and
other support services.
"It's going to be hugely beneficial for our clients," said
Candace Waldron, executive director of Help for Abused Women and
their Children.
Waldron said HAWC advocates help domestic violence victims file
restraining orders in district court. But she said any complicated
issues relating to divorce, child custody, and child support are
typically heard in probate court, and for those matters, "we really
need legal representation for our clients. That's what this center
is going to provide."
Having a lawyer can often be the difference between a woman
staying in a violent relationship and being able to break out of
one, Waldron said.
"Batterers use the courts as a way to maintain control," she
said. "One of the ways is they make threats like, 'Don't divorce
me. I can get everything, including the kids.' That's one of the
main reasons women don't want to leave. Without a lawyer facing the
batterer in the context of the courtroom . . . it can be
intimidating. A lot of women don't even want to start the process
because they feel already defeated."
Levesh and Palazzolo both bring experience in representing
domestic violence victims. Each lives in Gloucester.
A graduate of New England School of Law, Levesh, 47, has been a
staff attorney for legal service organizations for 16 years. For
the past five years she has worked for Greater Boston Legal
Services, based in Boston. Before that, she worked for Cambridge
and Somerville Legal Services, based in Cambridge, and for
Southeastern Massachusetts Legal Servces in New Bedford.
Palazzolo, 29, is a graduate of Boston College Law School. She
has worked as an attorney for the Merrimack Valley Legal Services
office for the past two years.
Levesh and Palazzolo, who serve on a statewide family law task
force, both say they look forward to working at the new center.
"It's an opportunity to do the kind of work I'm doing now -
which is advocating for victims of domestic violence - in my own
backyard," Levesh, who served for a time on HAWC's board, said.
"It's really exciting to me to be able to work with these people
who are so committed to this work."
Said Palazzolo, "One of the things that excites me about it is
starting up a new office and making our legal services more
accessible to people in the North Shore area. . . . Being in
Salemwill be a big plus for a lot of our clients."



