



Terrorist Attack Upstages Legal Services Initiative, But
Provides Greater Urgency For It
By Thomas Adcock
One morning last year, David Bookstaver arrived at work in lower
Manhattan and literally pulled the plug on the first official news
of what is surely the most substantial initiative for pro bono
publico in the history of the New York State Unified Court
System
- establishment of the "Access to Justice Center," the first
court-sponsored entity in the nation to address the shortfall of
civil legal services to the poor.
As communications director for the courts, Mr. Bookstaver
ordinarily has the duty of spreading such news across the state.
But on the morning in question, Mr. Bookstaver, a former
journalist, knew there was only one story to be told: the big one
still making headlines, known as simply "9/11."
Mr. Bookstaver was himself caught up in the middle of that big
story, walking along West Street on the way to his office. At 9:03
a.m., the second terrorist- piloted plane of the day screamed
overhead, then slammed into the south tower of the World Trade
Center.
With building debris and an ocean of smoke and dust pouring down
from the sky, Mr. Bookstaver ran for his life - four blocks
southeasterly to the Office of Court Administration at 25 Beaver
Street. He would later tell a New York Law Journal reporter of the
"deafening, thunderous, whistling noise that was like a missile - a
sound I never hope to hear again."
Finally, he was safe inside OCA headquarters, part of a 30-story
complex. But even there, he recollected, the walls shook and a
telephone slid off his desk as the twin towers of the former World
Trade Center imploded and collapsed. He spotted his assistant, Mai
Yee, at the fax machine. She had just sent the official news to the
first contact on her list: the Law Journal.
"I took the cord out of the wall from the fax machine," Mr.
Bookstaver said in a recent interview. "I said, 'Look, I'm not
going to send out something that's terribly important that could be
construed as trivial.' "
Meanwhile in Albany, three top jurists were set to back up the
news release with a press conference - Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye,
Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan Lippman and Judge Juanita Bing
Newton, deputy chief administrative judge for justice initiatives.
But never mind, news of the Justice Center - all the more important
in the wake of Sept. 11, an event that left thousands more New
Yorkers impoverished - would have to wait. Mr. Bookstaver's
reasoning for the delay went deeper than journalistic instinct,
back to his years as press officer for the Emergency Services Unit
of the New York Fire Department. With reference to the devastation
he witnessed, he said, "Most people would think that with all those
firefighters that it was OK, that things were under control. But I
know too much. I knew that friends of mine were dying in those
buildings."
Thus, the consensus-building for the Justice Center's main order
of business - the creation of a working structure for the orderly
donation of legal services by the private bar - did not commence
until last June, with the first of four pro bono convocations held
at the Manhattan campus of Fordham University School of Law.
Two more convocations are scheduled for October: at the State
University of New York campus in Buffalo on Oct. 15; and at Albany
Law School on Oct. 25. The final convocation is set for Nov. 8 in
Geneva at the Ramada Inn. Notes on the wide-ranging discussions at
each convocation will be compiled by Judge Newton's office and
submitted to the Court of Appeals for further consideration.

Public Service Bar Exam
At the same time, though in a far less formal way, consensus
building also began in June for yet another far-reaching proposal
for the courts' consideration, one with a distinctive pro bono
element - the so-called Public Service Alternative Bar Examination.
Within the next several weeks, the Association of the Bar of the
City of New York and the New York State Bar Association will issue
a joint report, based largely on the findings of a three-year study
by Kristin Booth Glen, a former State Supreme Court judge and dean
of the City University of New York School of Law.
The report will recommend a pilot project of up to two years'
duration to assess the effects of substituting public service for
the multi-state law segment of the current bar exam. At personal
option, law school graduates could perform supervised work in the
courts instead of demonstrating their ability to memorize tracts of
black letter law. In an essay scheduled for publication next month
in the Columbia Law Review - titled "Thinking Out of the Bar Exam
Box: a Challenge and Proposal for Change" - Dean Glen contends that
public service, scored by specially trained evaluators, would be a
more useful test of future lawyers' potential than rote memory, and
would simultaneously strike down what she sees as unfair barriers
for poor people and minorities seeking entry to the legal
profession.
In a copy of her essay for the Columbia Law Review, Dean Glen
suggests that students opting for public service could help fill
what Chief Judge Kaye and others have championed in the wake of
Sept. 11: the need to maintain the historic outpouring of volunteer
lawyering, and increase the spirit of volunteerism.
"The [alternative exam] would require applicants... to work as
lawyers in the court system for 10 to 12 weeks, performing a
variety of tasks," Dean Glen writes in her essay. "[T]he court
system has an enormous need for additional lawyer assistance....
[T]he chief judge has created numerous worthy justice initiatives
[but because] there is little or no additional funding... the
courts must rely on pro bono legal services if those initiatives
are to be successful.
"Placing [bar] applicants for three months contributes to, but
does not solve the courts' needs," the essay continued. "This is
why those who elected the [alternative exam] would have an
additional obligation-150 pro bono hours owed to the court system
in the three years following admission.
"For every 200 successful [alternative exam] takers, the courts
would have 30,000 pro bono hours of service, to be utilized as the
courts found most compelling. As an additional advantage, all of
that pro bono service would be done by attorneys already familiar
with and trained in the courts they would serve."
As an example of urgent pro bono need, Dean Glen cited the Civil
Court of New York, the nation's busiest. In landlord-tenant
disputes, small claims and housing matters, high numbers of poor
litigants must argue pro se. Only some of them receive help from
the Civil Court's Self-Representation Office, which Dean Glen
termed a "valiant attempt" at fair resolution. In the press release
delayed by Mr. Bookstaver last September, Judge Lippman was more
forceful in assessing the need for pro bono.
"The state of civil legal services has reached a turning point
in New York," Judge Lippman said in the release. "Ninety percent of
all tenants appearing in Housing Court - many facing eviction from
their homes - do not have an attorney. And while the demand is
great, the supply is shrinking.
"[T]he New York State Access to Justice Center... will galvanize
our efforts to find permanent civil legal service funding streams,
and I am confident that it will make significant headway in this
important area of public interest."
Among the approximately 150 lawyers at the Fordham convocation
was Kevin J. Curnin, a senior associate at Stroock & Stroock
& Lavan LLP and attorney director of the firm's Public Service
Project.
"We heard a lot of good ideas from people who've been
contributing for many years to pro bono service," said Mr. Curnin.
"We have to sift through all the ideas and decide what's best for
the state, and how to accommodate our differences. We do things
differently in New York City, for instance, than upstate." He
added, "We've made a good start."
Frederick P. Rooney, director of the Community Legal Resource
Network at CUNY Law, identified a major task ahead in meeting Chief
Judge Kaye's hopes for keeping the pro bono ball rolling:
legislation.
"We've got to reduce the liability of lawyers willing to engage
in pro bono, in much the same way the Good Samaritan Law protects
doctors who stumble onto accidents and provide care," said Mr.
Rooney, who is also a general practice partner in Rooney, Mannicci
& Gardner LLC of Bethlehem, Pa.
On the Public Service Alternative Bar Examination, Mr. Curnin
was reserved. "It will be a lightning rod for controversy," he
predicted. "But a new idea like that, as bold as it is - that's
what you'd expect."
Taking note of the generally conservative impulse of New York's
legal community, Mr. Curnin suggested that the multiple pro bono
aspect of Dean Glen's sweeping proposal could be lost on judges who
might dismiss the matter in terms of a bar exam procedural issue
with a "social good" patina.
"A lot of people are going to look at it and say, 'Well, I took
the exam the way it is and that's what I had to do it,"' said Mr.
Curnin. "What I'd love to see is this [alternative bar exam] in
conjunction with an increase in legal work for the poor at law
school clinics." Perhaps if the economic doldrums continue, and the
poor get poorer, the pro bono increase that Mr. Curnin and others
want will indeed occur. There does seem to be a relationship
between the state of the economy and the amount of free legal
service that big firms, at least, are willing or able to
perform.
Two years ago, American Lawyer magazine (a sister publication of
the Law Journal) found that during the fat year of 1999, the
approximately 50,000 lawyers at the nation's 100 highest-grossing
firms spent an average of eight minutes a day on pro bono cases, or
about 36 hours per year, which is down significantly from an
average 56 annual hours during the recession year of 1992. The
American Bar Association recommends that private firm attorneys
contribute 50 hours per year to pro bono work. By contrast, New
York's Volunteers of Legal Service recommends 30 hours.
Esther F. Lardent, director of the Pro Bono Institute at
Georgetown University Law Center, said the good economic times of
the late '90s saw lawyers at large firms suddenly responsible for
as many as 2,300 billable hours per year, compared with the less
time- consuming and more typical 1,700 hours.
Poverty law agencies, too, have recently registered fewer hours
of service to clients who most needed legal help. In 1996, a
Republican-controlled Congress prohibited lawyers receiving federal
funding - the mainstay of nearly all poverty law offices - from
engaging in class-action lawsuits and matters involving abortion,
illegal immigration or challenges to reduced welfare benefits
inaugurated by President Clinton and some other Democrats. But even
in good times - for lawyers, at least - there remain two seemingly
immovable stumbling blocks for private attorneys willing to go to
bat for poor people caught up in Civil Court matters:
Corporate lawyers whose transactional work seldom takes them
inside a live courtroom full of emotional, frightened civilians and
testy judges may feel like fish out of water in the great sea of
pro bono work: divorce and child custody issues, landlord-tenant
suits, workers' compensation and Social Security claims.
In a recent interview, Chief Judge Kaye noted efforts by the
City Bar and by emergency consortia of large Manhattan firms to
address this concern.
"We saw a whole new model develop - a holistic approach to
lawyering, one-stop shopping," she said. "Corporate lawyers
received brush-up training from the [City Bar], and a given firm
without certain expertise felt free to call on another firm that
had it." The result for pro bono clients traumatized by Sept. 11,
said Chief Judge Kaye, was more efficient delivery of needed
service: emotional, frightened clients had only one contact to
make, no matter how many problems they had; the lawyers would sort
out the mess. One of the principal functions of the Access to
Justice Center, she said, would be to foster such a holistic
approach.


The Slowly Grinding Wheels of Justice
On the second point, Judge Newton said in a recent interview,
"I've heard this complaint a hundred times. An attorney arrives [in
Civil Court] at 9:30 in the morning, hoping the matter can be taken
care of in an hour. But then for a whole range of reasons, the case
might not be heard until late in the afternoon - if at all that
day."
In meetings around the state, Judge Newton has invited court
administrators to suggest solutions to such complaints. A solution
that makes most sense, she said, would be to change calendar
procedures in order to expedite hearings where pro bono counsel are
scheduled to appear.
"We can solve this if we keep working together," said Judge
Newton. With reference to the dramatic increase in pro bono after
Sept. 11, she added, "The first thing I learned is that there is a
great passion among lawyers and judges to focus on access to
justice, no matter what problems we have to solve.
"The second thing I learned is the importance of collaboration
among judges, bar associations, private attorneys and civil legal
service providers. If we get everybody to the table, we'll
crystallize these problems and turn our focus onto solutions that
will work."
Meanwhile, Mr. Rooney suggested that lawyers might individually
elect to do more reduced fee or "low-bono" work - in the manner of
the New York firm Marcos & Negron LLP. Last year, the ABA
presented the firm with its Pro Bono Publico Award, despite the
fact that Marcos & Negron does not work for free.
"But they do outstanding work at reduced fees, and it was good
to see that encouraged by the ABA," said Mr. Rooney. His own firm
in Bethlehem, he said, operates under the Marcos & Negron
philosophy.
"We make a decent living. Sure, it would be great to make a lot
more. But when you represent a client in desperate need of service
who may not have the required retainer - guess what?
"That person will come back to you when they have a personal
injury case, or some other case that has the chance of substantial
economic gain," he said. "Kindness can pay off."




