



Business Wire

Texas Supreme Court Justice Deborah Hankinson Lauded For
Contributions to Legal Services to the Poor
Friday, October 11, 2002
AUSTIN, Texas--Oct. 11, 2002--The Texas Equal Access to Justice
Foundation, the largest Texas-based funding source for legal aid
organizations in the state, has awarded Justice Deborah Hankinson
the prestigious Harold F. Kleinman award for outstanding
contributions to the delivery of civil legal services to the
poor.
Hankinson, the Supreme Court of Texas liaison to the Foundation,
has worked tirelessly to ensure that poor and low-income Texans are
afforded access to justice. She led the charge in the creation of
the Texas Access to Justice Commission, an umbrella organization
designed to enhance the quality of legal services to the poor. She
was a strong supporter of the recent change to the State Bar of
Texas dues statement that requires attorneys to "opt-out" of making
a contribution to legal services. Through the opt-out approach,
Texas attorneys contributed $1 million this year, doubling 2001
contributions. Additionally, Hankinson was instrumental in securing
$5 million in Crime Victim Compensation funds, dedicated to the
provision of civil legal services for low- income crime
victims.
"In this time in which access to justice for underprivileged
Texans has suffered from Congressional retreat, litigation assault
and a decline in statewide funds, Justice Hankinson has been a
source of innovative ideas and inspirational leadership," TEAJF
Board Chairman Dick Tate said. "Her dedicated efforts have improved
the lives of countless poor Texans by opening for them the doors of
our justice system. She is the Harold Kleinman Award
personified."
The Kleinman Award is named after former Texas Equal Access to
Justice Foundation Chairman Harold F. Kleinman. The Foundation,
wishing to recognize Kleinman's outstanding character, commitment
and public service to the people of Texas, created the award to
confer prestige and honor upon leaders in the field of access to
civil justice.
"Deborah Hankinson has brought to the issue of civil legal
services to the poor the same passion she brings to her role as
judge," Texas Supreme Court Chief Justice Thomas R. Phillips said.
"She works from a formidable personal and intellectual commitment
that we can and should do better to make the justice system
accessible to all."
The Texas Equal Access to Justice Foundation presented the
Kleinman Award to Hankinson at its annual Court Luncheon. Upon
acceptance of the award, Hankinson said, "This award means so much
to me. Harold Kleinman was the managing partner at (the law firm
of) Thompson & Knight when I began working there. All the
associates admired him tremendously. He was the example of
professionalism, community service and compassion."
Hankinson, a native of Dallas, graduated cum laude with her
doctorate in jurisprudence from Southern Methodist University
School of Law. She was appointed to the Supreme Court of Texas in
1997, and was elected to the court in 1998. She will step down from
the court in December 2002.
The Texas Equal Access to Justice Foundation (www.txiolta.org)
administers funds to create community capacity to provide civil
legal services for low- income Texans. The organization is
committed to the vision that all Texans will have equal access to
justice, regardless of their income. The Foundation administers the
Interest on Lawyers' Trust Accounts (IOLTA) fund, the Basic Civil
Legal Services (BCLS) fund and the Crime Victims Civil Legal
Services (CVCLS) fund. The funds from each of these sources are
earmarked to assist nonprofit organizations in providing free civil
legal services to low-income




