



Texas Lawyer

GRANT PROVIDES FUNDING TO CONNECT LEGAL AID CALL CENTERS
Mary Alice Robbins September 9, 2002
A $100,000 technology grant awarded to Texas Rural Legal Aid
will fund an Austin call center and connect it with centers in San
Antonio and Corpus Christi to assist the poor with legal problems
in a 68-county area of Southwest Texas. Washington, D.C.-based
Legal Services Corp., which oversees federally funded legal aid,
awarded the grant to TRLA, which serves an area extending from
Austin south to the Rio Grande Valley and west to El Paso. The
award was announced at a news conference on Aug. 30 at the
University of Texas School of Law, which is participating in the
project.
According to LSC, only 20 percent of the low-income Texans who
have a civil legal problem are able to obtain attorneys to
represent them.
"It's a serious problem when four out of five low-income people
in Texas arrive at the courthouse door and essentially discover
they cannot afford the price of admission," says Mauricio Vivero,
LSC vice president. "While this grant cannot ensure justice for all
in Southwest Texas, this new legal advice line will mean thousands
more families can access critical legal advice when they need it
the most."
TRLA executive director David Hall says the call-in service is
more than a hotline for legal advice. UT law students will staff
the center and conduct the initial interviews with clients to find
out what their legal problems are and how they can be helped.
"It provides the front end for the lawyers in dealing with the
clients," Hall says. The idea, Hall says, is to keep attorneys off
the phones so that they can spend their time handling cases. Hall
says that the students will do eligibility screening to determine
whether callers qualify for legal assistance from TRLA. If a caller
meets TRLA's eligibility requirements, a comprehensive case work-up
will be done by a student, who may have to call a courthouse to get
records on the case, he says.
"What you normally think of a hotline doing is spending about 15
minutes on the phone with somebody, giving them some quick legal
advice, hanging up the phone and going to the next light blinking
on the panel," Hall says. "The way we try to approach it is to
identify every legal problem that a client has."
All the information and records that a student obtains are filed
in a computer system accessible by TRLA's attorneys throughout its
service area, Hall says.
This won't be the first time that TRLA has used law students to
take calls from indigents. The Austin center will expand services
provided by the Telephone Access to Justice call center in San
Antonio, where St. Mary's University School of Law students man the
phones.
Hall says the San Antonio center -- opened as an experiment
about five years ago -- has made "a tremendous difference in our
ability to reach out" to clients, whether they are in rural or
urban areas. TRLA also operates a small call-in center in Corpus
Christi, where paralegals take the calls, he says. With funding
from the grant, the three centers will be tied together in an
integrated phone system, he adds.
Mary Christine Reed, TAJ attorney and director, says the San
Antonio Center opened about 5,000 client files stemming from calls
received in 2001. The goal of the Austin center, which is expected
to open by January 2003, is to double the number of people served,
Hall says.
Law students who work at the San Antonio center are given an
opportunity to use their legal skills. Depending on the amount of
training they have, students can dispense preliminary legal advice
to clients but must document what advice they gave, Reed says. Reed
says students also are called to assist clients in rural areas with
pro se divorces for cases that she determines can be handled in
that manner. The students talk to the clients on the phone to get
the information on divorce cases and prepare the pleadings, which
are reviewed by attorneys before being given to clients to take to
court, she says.
"We follow that client through to filing it, to getting the
final hearing, to preparing the final decree, to making sure she
gets divorced," Reed says.
Reed says privilege attaches when the law students take
calls.
"They're working basically as a paralegal or legal assistant,"
she says. "It's the same as calling and speaking to a lawyer."
Reed says the San Antonio center fields calls on a number of
legal problems. About 20 percent of the callers are victims of
domestic violence who are given information about shelters where
they can find help, she says.
Calls also come from people who have been denied food stamps or
have problems with their landlords, she says.
Hall says that about 20 UT law students will be needed to answer
calls at the new center in Austin.
The indigents served by the center won't be the only ones to
benefit. William Powers, UT law school dean, says the project will
benefit the students who participate, teaching them early in their
careers about the need for pro bono service.
Says Powers, "This grant will help provide our students with
valuable professional
experience that will help them in whatever areas they go into,
but will also help them understand and have the ideals of providing
legal services to every citizen of the state."




