



The State of Pro Bono 2001
Elizabeth Amon
Staff Reporter
SEPT. 11 CAST a pall over 2001, but it led to a high point in
lawyers' efforts to give back to the community.
More than 2,500 lawyers in the New York and Washington, D.C.,
areas have helped affected families and small-business owners
through local bar groups. And the Association of Trial Lawyers of
America has moved to assist families free of charge when they go
file for federal aid.
The pages that follow describe the work of those and other
recipients of The National Law Journal's pro bono awards for
2001.
But what about the months before Sept. 11? From all the
indicators available, the record is mixed at best.
At the 106 firms that reported their pro bono hours to the NLJ
in the past two years, the number dropped from 3.28% to 3.06% of
billable hours. That number is high--the American Bar Association
suggests 3% as a goal--but the drop appears significant and it's
arguable that the firms reporting seem likely to be the ones
donating the most. Though it is a small percentage, the difference
represents thousands of hours. At a 300-lawyer firm, it would
translate into about 1,300 hours a year, more than half a
hard-working lawyer's billable time.
Esther Lardent, president of the Pro Bono Institute, administers
its Pro Bono Challenge, which confidentially tracks big law firms'
pro bono work. The data for 2001 aren't tallied, but she says the
numbers appear flat. "We have some firms that are strong and some
firms that have struggled," she says.
The key to a commitment to pro bono, Lardent says, is a firm's
stance on whether pro bono work counts internally as billable
hours. "Firms that are giving billable-hour parity for pro bono
work and showing that they mean it are the firms that are strong,"
she says. There's no count of pro bono contributions of solo
practitioners or midsize and small firms. But by one measure, it
seems to have been static.
The Legal Services Corp. (LSC), which works with attorneys
representing poor people, hasn't tallied this year's numbers, says
Mauricio Vivero vice president of public affairs, but he expects
them to be flat. That would follow a sharp decline a year earlier.
From 1999 to 2000 the number of pro bono cases handled by
LSC-affiliated attorneys dropped by 20,000, led by a drop in Texas
of 7,200.
Still, solo practitioners, like Tallahassee, Fla.'s Karen
Gievers, continue to distinguish themselves. Award winner Gievers
has worked more than 1,000 hours on behalf of foster children in
Florida.
Lawyers in death penalty work say they've seen a drop in
volunteerism. Capital cases are expensive and demanding, and those
involved in placing attorneys on them say large firms in particular
have shied away from them.
"It's a real crisis," says Robin Maher, director of the American
Bar Association pro bono death penalty representation project. "In
Alabama alone, there are 30 people on death row who don't have
lawyers."
One lawyer who has fought a capital conviction for years is
award winner JoNell Thomas, a Las Vegas solo practitioner. She's
worked more than 2,500 hours and counting on behalf of John Mazzan,
who was on Nevada's death row for 20 years before his release.
Also noteworthy is Minnesota's Lindquist & Vennum, whose
Charles J. Lloyd and Steven M. Pincus represented Albert Ronnie
Burrell. Wrongfully convicted of the murder of an elderly couple,
Burrell spent 13 years on Louisiana's death row before being
released last year.
James H. Schropp, a Washington partner at New York's Fried,
Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, represented Max Soffar, a
Texas inmate whose capital murder conviction was reversed after 21
years.
And Edwin S. Matthews Jr. of Coudert Brothers in New York
represented Don Paradis, who was released from prison after 14
years on death row in Idaho. Paradis won't be retried.

Unpopular Clients
Taking unpopular clients and controversial cases is another
measure of commitment. Award winner Kathleen T. Zellner of
Naperville, Ill.'s Zellner & Associates secured the release of
three men sentenced to life for the 1986 rape of a Chicago medical
student. In 2001, she spent 800 hours of pro bono time and $50,000
of her own money on an appeal based on DNA evidence.
David Lubitz of D.C.'s Swidler Berlin Shereff Friedman,
challenged an Annapolis, Md., ordinance allowing the police to
eject people from designated "drug loitering-free zones." Lubitz'
demonstrated that the law targeted predominantly minority
populations. The court found it unconstitutional.
In Philadelphia, Pepper Hamilton's David Richman spent 18 years
in litigation with the city over its prisons. In a class action
that concluded in a settlement at the end of 2000, he succeeded in
changing the oppressive conditions of confinement in Philadelphia's
prisons.
Among the nominations for the NLJ's award were a number of
lawyers who performed significant pro bono work that helped
nonprofit organizations provide legal services to the needy.
Alan Sullivan of the Salt Lake City office of Phoenix's Snell
& Wilmer has spent countless pro bono hours since 1998 helping
to increase the proportion of lawyers who donate to Utah public
interest law organizations from 5% to 36%.
An important figure in Atlanta is Terry Walsh of Alston &
Bird, who has championed the welfare of children in Georgia. Not
only has he helped set up organizations to provide services for
children, like the Truancy Intervention Project, but he resigned
his equity partnership to be able to do so.
Some cases are challenging because they are so unusual. Lawyers
at Seattle's Perkins Coie represented two Cold War-era defectors
who claim the CIA didn't keep promises of financial support. Steve
Hale and Betsy Alaniz's clients overcame a CIA claim of immunity
from judicial scrutiny, and the case is in discovery.
Reed Smith's lawyers spent 6,352 hours to recover the archive of
Pittsburgh photographer Teenie Harris, who was swindled out of his
negatives.
Cindy Kernick, Donna Doblick and Colleen Lynch won a jury
verdict that awarded Harris more than $4.2 million in damages,
enough to permit the estate to get a judgment and execute on the
negatives.
An area in which pro bono work has surged is among another
traditionally unpopular and vastly under-represented group:
immigrants.
"There's a greater level of interest in immigration, asylum and
international human rights work," Lardent says.
Latham & Watkins was an award winner chiefly because of its
remarkable involvement in immigration cases on behalf of
unaccompanied minors.
Among runners-up is Boston solo Eleanor Newhoff. Nancy Kelly of
Greater Boston Legal Services estimates that Newhoff spent between
500 and 750 hours on pro bono in 2001 on 40 cases she took through
Kelly's office. And she did other pro bono work as well.


Problems for Muslims
Sept. 11 may reflect a failing of the legal profession during a
crisis for one group, Muslim and Middle Eastern men.
Sohail Mohammed, a Clifton, N.J., solo practitioner, has been
scrambling to get information on the number of them locked up in
New Jersey after the attacks. He estimates it may be upward of 600,
mostly without lawyers.
Mohammed credits the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) with
helping to find lawyers to take cases but says he's frustrated that
other groups, including the American Immigration Lawyers
Association (AILA) haven't acted faster to organize pro bono
representation.
Jeanne A. Butterfield, executive director of AILA, says it
hasn't tried to organize pro bono lawyers for those detained

because of the charges they face.
"The most pressing need for pro bono are for asylum applicants,"
she says. "A student visa overstayer is not going to be a high
priority for pro bono assistance."
While AILA has joined the ACLU and other organizations in a
Freedom of Information Act request to find out who is being
detained where and why, Mohammed notes that the reasons for the
immigrants' detention were not immediately clear and sometimes had
dire consequences.
"For the first three or four weeks when we were at the height of
these disturbing trends, people were picked up and missing from
their families and one person died in detention," he says. "I would
expect the legal community to be in the forefront of trying to
bring this issue to light."




