



The Columbian
Tuesday, June 11, 2002
Washington State Legal Aid Program Challenge

Reaches U.S. High Court
PAUL QUEARY, Associated Press writer
OLYMPIA -- The U.S. Supreme Court agreed Monday to hear a
Washington case challenging the widespread practice of pooling
client money held by lawyers and using the interest to pay for
legal services for the poor.
A Washington Supreme Court rule issued in 1984 requires lawyers
to put clients' money in a pooled account if the amount is too
small or will be held for too short a time to earn interest for the
individual client.
The rule was later expanded to include real estate closing
offers.
The interest from the pooled money adds up to about $6 million
per year statewide. It goes to the Legal Foundation of Washington,
which doles it out to 34 legal aid agencies around the state.
The Washington Legal Foundation a Washington, D.C., organization
that defends private property rights sued in federal court in 1997
to overturn the practice. The foundation argues the practice
essentially steals the interest from the clients, an illegal taking
of personal property under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution.
"No one person suffers an awful lot," said Richard Samp, the
foundation's chief counsel. "But it's a small amount of money
that's stolen from a lot of people."
Similar programs called IOLTA, or Interest on Lawyers' Trust
Accounts exist in all 50 states so the case could have broad
impact.
Advocates argue that the program is an important source of legal
help for poor people forced to deal with civil legal matters
including domestic violence protection orders, child custody fights
and eviction disputes.
"We only can help right now about one out of five people who ask
for help," said Barbara Clark, executive director of the Legal
Foundation of Washington. "The potential loss of this funding is
very devastating."
IOLTA contributes 38 percent of the money available for low-
income civil legal assistance in Washington, Clark said.
Advocates also argue that interest is essentially created by the
program because taxes and accounting costs would eat away the money
if lawyers tried to set up a similar program to benefit the
clients.
But Samp argues that IOLTA programs essentially discourage
lawyers from setting up such pooled accounts that might benefit
their clients.
A U.S. District Court initially dismissed the Washington case,
but a three-judge panel of the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
overturned the ruling. Then the full 9th Circuit overruled its own
justices in the state's favor, agreeing with the state's contention
that the clients weren't harmed because the interest wouldn't be
earned otherwise.




