



The Bend Bulletin

High Court Judge Visits Bend to Promote Better Legal Aid

Matthew Taran
Thursday, October 24, 2002
When an Oregon Supreme Court Justice arrived at Central Oregon's
Office of Legal Aid Services Wednesday evening about 30 minutes
late and with wind-blown hair, nobody thought much of it.
Then again nobody attending an open house to discuss legal aid
funding and service issues in the state knew exactly what Thomas A.
Balmer went through to give a speech on the subject.
Halfway to Bend on his drive form Salem, Balmer's old Volvo
wagon started smoking and died. Only as far as the Santiam Pass,
there was no time to spare.
Balmer grabbed the paper that he had jotted notes for his speech
on and abandoned his neck tie and formerly reliable vehicle. It had
been a long time since he flagged a ride with his thumb, but he was
desperate. Luckily a Mustang convertible headed for Bend offered a
lift.
A little car trouble wasn't about to keep him from delivering
his message.
"Through support for legal aid we can make sure we are not
closing courthouse doors on anybody," Balmer told about 20 lawyers,
judicial and legislative leaders during the open house.
Oregon's 16 Legal Aid offices strive to provide civil legal
services for the state's lowincome population.
About 20 percent of Oregon residents qualify for the legal aid
but only about 111 lawyers (less than 1 percent of the bar) compose
the state's legal aid services network.
Legal Aid offices reject two out of three people that qualify
for help and have a legitimate grievance because they don't have
the resources officials said.
Oregon is meeting 18 percent of the need for civil legal
services to low-income Oregonians, according to a Legal Need
Study.
"The biggest crisis is federal funding," said Bob Turner,
director of Central Oregon regional office in Bend. "Federal
funding is half of what it was in 1980." In 1996 legal aid services
were nearly eliminated by U.S. House leaders. Instead, they cut
funding by $122 million, causing 300 office closures and 900
attorney layoffs nationwide.
Federal funding accounts for about one third of Oregon's
estimated $11.5 legal aid budget. The remainder comes from filing
fees, interest on Lawyer's Trust Accounts, contributions from
attorneys, foundation grants and corporate support.
With that money legal aid provides the poor, elderly, disabled,
unemployed and disadvantaged population with civil legal services.
They help those people with housing, domestic violence, divorce,
child custody and employment cases.
A big part of legal aid's success depends on pro bono, or free,
work by lawyers.
"Legal aid is so important for our community and country because
people need to have access to the court system," former state Sen.
Neil Bryant said.
For that reason it's too important for lawyers not to
participate pro bono, he said.
Retired Judge Joseph Thalhofer agreed.
At Wednesday's open house the local office honored him with an
award for his dedication to providing pro bono legal assistance for
low-income seniors in Central Oregon.
"It's kind of fun doing this pro bono work," Thalhofer said.





