



Legal Services Too Crucial to Take Cut
Gerry L. Alexander, Chief justice
Gerry L. Alexander is chief justice of the Washington State
Supreme Court.
On Feb. 14, Gov. Gary Locke issued an order cutting nearly half
the annual state funding for civil legal services - $2.4 million
-from the state budget. Already strained to the breaking point,
this cut will devastate the civil equal justice delivery system in
our state.
For the poor and vulnerable, the justice system represents the
place of last resort - the place where essential rights are
enforced and defended. For thousands upon thousands who need
protection from domestic abuse, wrongful eviction or the improper
denial or termination of essential governmental assistance, our
state's civil legal services programs (pro bono legal aid) hold the
key.
If this budget cut is left unmitigated, the governor's action
threatens irreparable harm to truly effective and important legal
services programs. It is critical that the Legislature correct this
situation by replacing all or most of the amount cut.
I was a Superior Court judge in Thurston County in 1980. Before
me was a man with a toothless smile. As I remember it, the state
Department of Social and Health Services had agreed to pay to pull
his teeth out but, due to a budget crisis, the department decided
that it would not pay for the dentures that he needed. The man had
no money and could not afford to hire a lawyer. However, a legal
services lawyer from Spokane filed a lawsuit challenging the
department's refusal to pay for the man's dentures. I decided that
the department had acted illegally. The man got his teeth. And in
my view, justice was served.
In 1980, there were three primary legal services programs in our
state. Together they had a force of 130 attorneys and the
responsibility to serve the civil legal needs of about 550,000 poor
and vulnerable people throughout the state. There were legal
services offices in 24 locations from Walla Walla to Port Angeles,
from Clarkston and Colville to Chehalis and Longview, from Seattle
to Spokane. In those days, the poor had a place to go, and they
knew it.
The picture is much different today. The legal services programs
that existed in 1980 are gone, gutted by two decades of budget
cuts, stagnant funding and increasing costs. In their place we have
two statewide providers of direct legal assistance to poor and
vulnerable people. They operate with a third fewer attorneys and
must try to meet the needs of a poverty population that has doubled
to nearly 1.2 million. While these attorneys are joined by
thousands of volunteer attorneys who last year contributed more
than 27,000 hours of free legal assistance, civil justice is still
unavailable for thousands who need it. The $2.4 million cut will
cause irreversible damage.
Most of us have no idea how many families and individuals are
barely surviving. They are victims of domestic violence, single
moms trying to navigate the regulatory maze that strangles their
efforts to move from dependency to self-sufficiency, foster
children who are maltreated, migrant and seasonal farm workers who
are not paid or are forced to work in unsafe and unsanitary
conditions. There are so many needing help, each with a compelling
and sometimes life-and-death story. Until now, the legal services
system has been able to support only an estimated 20 percent of
those who need our help. It is unfathomable to think about the
impact of further cuts.
It is obvious that every social and human service budget will
suffer from very painful cuts as a result of the current budget
crisis. But legal services are not just social programs, they are
justice programs.
Legal service programs are the only solution for thousands of
disenfranchised Washingtonians who need to assert and enforce their
rights on matters of sheer survival. And, given the weak economy
and the forthcoming budget cuts, these people need more help right
now, not less.
Every day thousands of children in our state recite the Pledge
of Allegiance. The pledge ends with an affirmation of the essential
promise of our democracy - "with liberty and justice for all."
The
U.S. Supreme Court building is carved with the words "Equal
Justice Under Law." People in every corner of the world fight and
die for the American ideal of equal justice.
But does equal justice exist only for those with means to
petition the courts? Can equal justice exist where the laws cannot
be enforced because the poor cannot secure counsel? Each time a
poor person is denied access to the justice system - to assert or
defend important legal rights - a small piece of our democracy
dies.
In November 2001, the Washington State Supreme Court created the
Task Force on Civil Equal Justice Funding, with 19 representatives
of the Judiciary, the Legislature and the governor's office. This
task force is committed to solving the problem of adequately
funding access to civil justice in this state. Formed three months
before anyone knew the depth of the state budget cuts, we
admittedly are alarmed. How can we resuscitate an already sick
system while enduring even deeper cuts?
The Legislature needs to do the right thing for the people of
this state. It must act to replace all or most of the $2.4 million
cut from legal services. It is our duty as a democratic society -
and as compassionate leaders in the state of Washington - to make
sure that we really do ensure justice for all.



