



The Daily Record

Towson Attorney Designs Project to Benefit Legal Aid

Earl Kelly
Friday, December 6, 2002
Lawyer Eliot M. Wagonheim of Towson has designed a project that
will benefit two Baltimore County law-related organizations and
establish a fund for helping area firefighters who become
disabled.
Wagonheim said the program not only will benefit the needy, but
also will help improve the public image of lawyers.
"It not only raises money for charity," he said, "but gives
people something else to think about the next time they hear a
lawyer joke."
Called Take 2, the endeavor will be funded by attorneys who
donate either 2 percent of their earnings or $2 for each billable
hour charged on Thursdays in March 2003. As for attorneys who
handle contingency cases or who are salaried, Wagonheim said they
could participate by donating some amount that approximated such a
donation.
Donors may earmark contributions to go to the Legal Aid Bureau
for use in Baltimore County, to charitable programs run by the
Baltimore County Bar Foundation, or to benefit families of
firefighters and rescue workers who are killed or injured.
Wagonheim said he initially hoped to recruit about 300
contributors for Take 2's first year, and projected donations of
upwards of $15,000.
After contacting attorneys about Take 2, Wagonheim is beginning
to revise his projections.
"The response has led me to believe its going to be much higher
than that," Wagonheim said. "I can't tell you how excited I am by
it."


Focal Point
Wagonheim has experience in creating charitable endeavors. He
was one of the organizers of the now-famous Chesapeake Blues
Festival, an event held each Year since 1998 at Sandy Point State
Park outside Annapolis for the benefit of several charities.
But Wagonheim eschewed the publicity.
"I really hope the focus won't be on me doing charity work but
will be on Take 2," said Wagonheim, who added that Baltimore County
Bar Association President Stephen J. Nolan was instrumental in
launching the new program.
Nolan said of Take 2, "Lawyers individually are doing a lot for
the community, and this is one way we can channel our efforts."
Wilhelm H. Joseph Jr., executive director of the Legal Aid
Bureau, which helps fund legal services for the poor in civil
matters, said that Take 2 "is not charity. It's about the
professional responsibility of each individual lawyer and the Bar
Association."
The Take 2 initiative will reach well beyond the legal
profession and serve members of the broader community.
Baltimore County firefighters do not have a formal program to
provide a financial boost to firefighters and paramedics who are
injured and unable to work.
This shortcoming became evident following terrorist attacks on
the World Trade Center in New York City, where firefighters have
such a fund that helps members' families in times of need.
"Let's say a Baltimore County firefighter is from North County
and they are injured and are in the shock trauma unit in Baltimore
but a family member can't commute from the Pennsylvania line,"
Wagonheim said. "Right now, the firefighters will pass the hat and
help raise money to put the family up, but there is no fund."
Firefighter Michael R. Rehfeld, a ladder truck driver and
17-year veteran of the force, was working to create such a fund,
and Wagonheim heard of his efforts.
Rehfeld, reached yesterday between emergency runs caused by the
heavy snowfall, said critically injured firefighters and rescue
workers often must hire others, such as plumbers and yard workers,
to help maintain their homes during periods of convalescence.
"We saw what happened up in New York and how much critical need
there was to establish this," Rehfeld said. "Take 2 is the starting
point, and we hope to establish an endowment."
Wagonheim, who teaches the professionalism course for the
Maryland State Bar Association, said he is working with the MSBA to
create a statewide Take 2-type program.
Attorneys who want to participate in Take 2 may call the
Baltimore County Bar Association at 410-337-9103 or contact the
association at www.bcba.org or Wagonheim at www.wtlawfirm.com.





