



Understanding Where They're Coming From

Hotline offers aid and advice to Asian immigrants who find
themselves in desperate situations and don't know where to
turn.
Erin Chan
Sunday, July 14, 2002
Kim Luu and her six co-workers never see the callers' faces.
They will never meet 42-year-old Tranh Tran and her
cash-strapped Westminster family, never hug the terrified
70-year-old woman who has just been evicted and never personally
comfort the battered women seeking divorces but petrified of losing
their immigration status.
But they've talked. And that's enough to touch the callers'
lives.
Luu and her colleagues work at a toll-free hotline, the Asian
Language Legal Intake Project. They use their language skills and
experiences--Luu's family fled North Vietnam when she was an
infant--to add resonance to their advice.
With their fluent Vietnamese and Mandarin, they help Tran
understand her family's eligibility for Medi-Cal and food stamps,
assist the 70-year-old woman in finding a place to live and advise
abused women how they can stay in the country while staying away
from their husbands.
Through the free hotline, which officially made its debut last
week, Luu and other project employees calm anxious callers and even
elicit laughs from those who don't know where else to turn.
"These people are desperate for information," said Juliet Stone,
29, the project's supervising attorney. "This is so needed in the
community."
The project links four legal service organizations in Los
Angeles and Orange counties--the Asian Pacific American Legal
Center, the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles, Neighborhood Legal
Services and the Legal Aid Society of Orange County.
Callers dial (800) 267-7395 for Vietnamese-language assistance,
or (800) 520- 2356 for Mandarin. An employee records personal
information and determines, on the basis of income and place of
residence, if a caller is eligible for assistance. After a
two-month pilot program, the hotline is now in full operation.
Plans are to expand the effort to include Korean and Khmer, the
main Cambodian language, by next year.
A confused Tran called Luu a few weeks ago seeking advice on
Medi-Cal, a term she had heard since arriving two months ago from
Ho Chi Minh city, the former Saigon.
"A lot of these people come from an inherently repressive
regime," Luu said. "They don't think of going to the government for
assistance and public benefits."
Luu recorded Tran's basic information and described Medi-Cal's
medical assistance programs, advising Tran of her rights and
finding a location close to Tran's Westminster home where she could
apply.
The hotline staff can elicit information that would be
difficult, if not impossible, in English. Luu recently spent an
hour on the phone with a distraught woman.
"She just kept crying," Luu said. "We have to be extremely
patient with them."
The woman had called the day before she was to be evicted from
her apartment. After coaxing information from the woman, Luu called
the elder-abuse hotline. Although the woman was evicted, Luu's
resourcefulness and a social worker's efforts found her a place at
a senior citizens facility.
"We're looking for a new way of serving the underserved
community," said Bob Cohen, executive director of the Legal Aid
Society of Orange County. "Anything we can do to get out in the
community, to make folks aware of how easy it is to get service,
that they won't be ripped off, is important.... "
According to census data, the Vietnamese population in Orange
County jumped by nearly 89% between 1990 and 2000, while the
Chinese population increased by 44%.
In Los Angeles County, the Vietnamese population rose nearly 25%
in the decade, while the Chinese population leaped by more than
34%.
More than 1.5 million Asians and Pacific Islanders now live in
the two counties. Many have little or no English skills.
Stewart Kwoh, president of the Asian Pacific American Legal
Center, said the idea of a hotline had been tossed around for
years. But the latest census figures and an influx of grant money
convinced center staff members that the time had come to begin the
program.
Kwoh's efforts have raised more than $300,000 from the Open
Society Institute and the Community Technology Foundation of
California to anchor the hotline.
Staff members have appeared on Vietnamese radio and Mandarin
television to publicize the program.
Tran called the hotline after her sister heard Luu on Bolsa
Radio, 106.3 FM. The broadcasts have made Luu a celebrity of sorts.
Callers regularly greet her with: "Ms. Kim, I have this problem and
I need your help."
In part, hotline workers gain immigrants' faith because they
understand where their callers are coming from--literally.
When she glances down at the tattoo on her right forearm, staff
attorney Anita Le's forehead furrows in pain at the bold black
letters that spell out "Le Quang Thai Ha." That's the name of the
sister who never made it out of Vietnam--who at age 15, drowned
when bullets tore through the boat in which she was trying to
escape.
"We never forget where we came from," said Le, 29, who arrived
in the United States six years after her sister's death. "We're in
a vacuum without helping others."
Stories stream from Luu, too, of how she and her parents fled
North Vietnam in 1979. She described how her family sat waist-deep
in water for two weeks on a leaky fishing boat to Hong Kong, how
her father gave up his own ration of rice to feed his family, how
they settled in Louisville, Ky., with $100 and a gold wedding ring
among them.
"Right now, I'm giving back to the community I grew up in," said
Luu, 24, who lives in Alhambra. "The fact that I speak Vietnamese
every day reconfirms that I'm still very Vietnamese.
"Even though I'm American, I can relate to them. I understand
the depths of their pain."




