



Using Tech Tools to Serve The Underserved

by Wendy R. Leibowitz
LexisONE
Technology is slowly transforming pro bono efforts, on and off
the Web. But there is still a long way to go.
Pro bono has come a long way in a short time. Susan M. Hoffman,
the pro bono coordinator at Washington, D.C.'s Crowell &
Moring, regularly receives queries from non-profit organizations
via email. She compiles the emails into different messages and
distributes them to lawyers in her firm, who volunteer, sometimes
via email, to take the cases.
"I have a political asylum email list, a domestic violence list,
a hotline list, and so on," she says. She carefully notes the
referring organization - Catholic Charities Legal Network, or the
Fair Housing Council of Greater Washington - in each email.
Ms. Hoffman also maintains her own database of attorney
interests. "I can go in and search and pull up an attorney
interested in child abuse and neglect, so when I get a case, I can
target it," she says.
Recently she had lunch with some of the referring legal
assistance organizations to try to improve their recruitment and
matching efforts even more. She also sends around pro bono email
questionnaires to find out which types of cases attorneys are most
interested in.
Technology is transforming pro bono but there is a great deal to
do, particularly as many legal assistance agencies still lack basic
technology, such as Internet connections. Those places need
donations of good equipment as much or more than they need
donations of lawyer hours.
But as lawyers try to meet demands with technology, the basic
needs remain: meeting the need for legal services among the poor or
underserved. Some of the unmet needs are among people who can pay,
but who are deterred from seeking a lawyer because of the
uncertainty about legal fees and their fear of the profession.
The British writer Richard Susskind calls these potential
clients "the latent market." Small firms and solos are ideal for
such clients, but the clumsy, sometimes impersonal referral
networks, and the prejudice against flat-fee billing serve as huge
barriers between client and lawyer. Slowly, Web sites are emerging
to serve them: Divorcelawinfo.com helps people educate themselves
about divorce; MyCounsel.com is aimed at small businesses, and
there are many others, including Nolo.com, which helps people help
themselves, without a lawyer. But there is little public awareness
of these sites at present.
A recent front page story in the New York Times featured a
fifteen-year old boy who was answering legal questions on a Web
site called Askme.com, with knowledge he gleaned solely from Court
TV and Judge Judy's televised courtroom.
"Despite public perceptions to the contrary, there is an
enormous gap between those in need of legal assistance and the
lucky few who manage to find a lawyer to counsel them," says Esther
Lardent, president of the Pro Bono Institute. "Technology is one
important tool to help bridge this gap-by making it easier for
lawyers and clients to find each other, making basic legal
information more easily available, and demystifying the law so that
potential clients are more willing to seek legal help."
The need is great. Even after it was revealed on AskMe.com that
"LawGuy1975" was only fifteen years old, people continued to ask
for him by name. For one thing, LawGuy's answers were clear and
prompt, while the actual lawyers' answers could be turgid, filled
with statutory language, including formal citations, sometimes
posted long after the question appeared.
But it's clear that there are indeed lawyers out there, many
from small firms, who are ready and able to help. The problem is
that boards like AskMe.com don't do a good job of matching lawyers
who are licensed in a particular jurisdiction (or, in the case of
LawGuy1975, licensed at all) with clients in the same area.
The need to distinguish between ANY legal information, which
LawGuys can provide, and GOOD guidance, which knowledgeable lawyers
can provide, remains paramount.
One area where lawyers are reaching out effectively to clients
over the Web is immigration law. Sites such as www.visalaw.com, or
www.shusterman.com, provide a wealth of information in several
languages, free email newsletters, and up-to-date, targeted
guidance.
Greg Siskind, who launched Visalaw.com, says he is working on
building personal, secure Web sites for each client who wants one,
so people can check the status of their cases without having to
call the firm.
Tight immigrant networks (the personal kind) help publicize the
most effective attorneys. And immigration is ideal for the Web:
it's a federal, forms-based practice that rarely requires meeting
the client.
But in practice areas other than immigration, linking lawyers
with clients still revolves around either asking your relatives and
neighbors if they know a lawyer, or calling a bar association and
getting the next name on the list. A plethora of listings are
available at Lawyers.com, but the amount of information is almost
overwhelming to the novice.
Recently, the American Bar Association launched
Findlegalhelp.org. Like like many ABA sites, it takes a while to
download, and it requires a few clicks to actually find a lawyer,
but once you plow your way through a few screens, you find that the
ABA has placed an asterisk next to associations that have earned
the ABA's approval:
i-Lawyer.com* Chicago Bar Association* Los Angeles County Bar
Lawyer Referral Service* Assoc. of the Bar of the City of New York
Lawyer Referral Service*
Of course, if you're not in those areas, you're back to
AskMe.com or FreeAdvice.com or RipOffCity.com. Some wonderful legal
service agencies, such as the National Association of Public
Interest Lawyers, (NAPIL), at www.napil.org, have Web sites that
are devoid of explanations about what public interest lawyers
really do, and which appear to be so corporate in appearance that
they could just as easily be an Annual Report. Many of the
materials are posted only in PDF (portable document format), which
must be downloaded to be read.
Private practioners must step up to the plate to reach out to
the clients, online, if only to save the image of the profession
from LawGuy1975 and NAPIL. Remember that contacting legal agencies
for pro bono clients can lead to paying work.
Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts, Veterans' Organizations, the
Legal Aid Society-these are networks bigger than most corporate
networks, involving contract disputes, benefits work, contacts with
large government agencies that themselves could be the source of
work. Arts contacts bring in contract disputes, copyright disputes,
even international artistic disputes, as when a young artist
displayed his work in Brussels, only to see his work destroyed.
When small firms and solos do use technology to help smaller
clients, the resulting publicity can generate much good will. Sole
practitioner Carolyn Elefant, frustrated that
U.S. Supreme Court cases were posted all over the Web, but
resources needed to help people in benefits cases, adoption
matters, and landlord/tenant disputes were not, built her own pro
bono library on her Web site, at www.his.com/~Israel/loce/pro
bono/pro bono.html. In addition to being a wonderful library of
resources, it has become a source of referrals, she said.
Indeed, new Web sites can now be a destination for those cold
calls (or e-mails) seeking legal help that used to be turned away
or sent to the state bar association. As most laws vary
state-by-state, queries from out-of-state used to meet a dead end.
But now, criminal law queries can be referred to Families Against
Mandatory Minimums, at www.famm.org, a national group that might be
able to help a caller, no matter where the person is in the United
States. More such sites are needed.
A major Web site dedicated to pro bono, called ProBono.net, is
seeking firm to mount and maintain pages within its site dedicated
to particular issues. Crowell & Moring may take on an
Employment Law page, says Ms. Hoffman. Basic grunt work, such as
putting form documents and templates on the Web, is still needed.
"Drafting a complaint in a custody case is pretty rudimentary, but
can be intimidating" if you've never done it before, acknowledges
Ms. Hoffman. ProBono.net hooks up experienced lawyers with relative
newbies. But what really, really sells pro bono cases is that the
work is interesting, meaningful and rewarding. They involve direct
service. And good lawyers can and should provide it, using all the
tools available in our time.
Wendy R. Leibowitz is an attorney and legal columnist in
Washington, D.C.




