



Valley Needing Legal Services
McALLEN (AP) - The consolidation of legal services agencies for
the poor may improve efficiency, but won't increase the number of
clients served, a rural legal specialist in South Texas says.
David Hall, director of Texas Rural Legal Aid in Weslaco, said
legal services for the poor in the Rio Grande Valley are inadequate
and need a dramatic increase in funding.
"We've got one lawyer for every 30,000 poor people in the
Valley," Hall said in Sunday's editions of The Monitor
(McAllen).
As part of a nationwide overhaul of Legal Services Corp. to get
more poor people legal help, nine legal aid groups in Texas are
being folded into three, creating mega-programs involving dozens of
counties across thousands of miles.
John McKay, president of the organization, said the refocused
and larger programs can raise more money, find more lawyers and
increase the number of poor people who get help through the civil
courts system.
The programs, supplemented by funding from state governments,
bar associations and foundations, provide free legal help to the
poor but not in criminal cases.
But Hall said what's needed is more money. He said his group
takes on about 10,000 cases per year with a staff of eight or nine
attorneys.
Of the $329 million appropriated by Congress to Legal Services
Corp. this year, the Valley receives about $15 million to $20
million and employs about 37 staff lawyers. Organizations that
provide free or "pro bono" services are able to maintain a better
lawyer-to-client ratio because they often specialize in particular
kinds of cases, Hall said. Even accounting for pro bono work, as
much as 90 percent of the legal needs of the poor go unmet,
according to Bill Underwood, a law professor at Baylor
University.
"If every lawyer in the state of Texas was doing pro bono work,
then that still wouldn't be enough," he said.
Underwood said one lawyer working full-time for a legal services
group can accomplish as much as 20 lawyers doing part-time pro bono
work on a similar case.
"The problem is, there's never been adequate public funding," he
said.
But Ken Boehm, a former counsel to the LSC board said a lack of
funding for the federal LSC program is not the problem, it needs
reform



