



Chicago Daily Law Bulletin
April 27, 2002

Volunteers Step Up on Law Day
Robert E. Hirshon
On Law Day, lawyers throughout the nation are going back to
school.
They're going into classrooms to help students understand and
appreciate fundamental American values. A new "Dialogue on Freedom"
Web site -- www.dialogueonfreedom.org -- is giving lawyers the
tools to conduct robust discussions with students. The hope is that
young people will come to understand that we can maintain the
freedoms that are rooted in our nation's very soul while ensuring
the safety of our citizens. Even within the new and frightening
landscape of the post-Sept. 11 world, the familiar landmarks of the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights can -- indeed, must -guide
us.
This major initiative, conceived by Supreme Court Justice
Anthony M. Kennedy, is the American Bar Association's principal Law
Day outreach this year. I salute the men and women of the legal
profession who are donating their time, skills and experience to
enhance public understanding of and respect for the rule of law
that defines our democracy and protects our freedoms.
Another kind of attorney volunteerism deserves a salute on this
Law Day -- the tireless pro bono efforts of lawyers, whereby
attorneys take no fee for legal work that enables people of limited
means to get the help they need.
Over the entrance to the U.S. Supreme Court are carved the words
"Equal Justice Under Law." These words represent both a reality and
an aspiration. A reality in that America's courts are open to
everyone, and even the least powerful can seek justice, against the
mightiest opponents. But the words are also an aspiration, because
many Americans can't afford legal services, and so are unable to
take full advantage of our great legal system. The American Bar
Association and state and local bar associations have worked
tirelessly to bring legal services to more and more people. In
keeping with those efforts, "Assuring Equal Justice for All" is the
theme of Law Day this year.
I first became involved in the work of the ABA when I was
appointed to the Standing Committee on Lawyers' Public Service
Responsibility. A substantial focus of our work then and now was
encouraging lawyers to donate their services pro bono publico --
"for the good of the public." At that time, barely 20 years
ago:


-
The organized bar did not have an infrastructure to
supply volunteer lawyers to meet the legal needs of the
poor.


-
Bar-sponsored pro bono programs -- where they did exist
-- were mostly local and mainly urban, with volunteer lawyers
representing a fairly narrow slice of the legal
community.


Our profession, however, did not sit idly by. We organized.
Working together, the ABA and the National Legal Aid and Defender
Association created a new system of legal services, linking pro
bono programs with local legal service programs to serve the needs
of this nation's low-income population.
The most tangible evidence of this effort was the development of
bar-sponsored pro bono programs in every state, in every sizable
metropolitan area, and in many rural areas as well.
The success of these programs is undeniable. We have not simply
changed a profession; we have changed lives.
We have improved the lives of children -- by resolving
complicated and hostile family disputes, by facilitating adoptions
and custody agreements, and by helping children find the comfort,
the certainty and the safety of home and family.
We have improved the lives of the elderly -- by protecting our
senior citizens from unscrupulous business persons and by giving
the older generation financial security and comfort through
voluntary estate planning.
We have improved the lives of tens of thousands of women -- by
assuring that those who are victims of domestic violence can seek
orders of protection, divorces and child support, so they can leave
dangerous situations and raise their children in an environment
where fear is not a constant companion.
But more remains to be done. Even today, we estimate that only
20 percent of the legal needs of the poor are met through legal aid
and pro bono. I call on lawyers everywhere to share in the highest
aspirations of our profession, and to help realize our unwavering,
unyielding commitment to the 200-year-old promise of equal justice
under law for everyone.




