



Alpaugh water fees may triple

It's either a big increase or a loss of service for the Tulare
County town.
By Joan Obra
Alpaugh residents may see their water fees triple to avoid
losing service at the end of the month.
The debate will unfold tonight at a Tulare County Water Works
District 1 meeting. The district, which provides water service to
homes in Alpaugh, faces an unpalatable choice: raise its monthly
$20 household fee or go without the arsenic-tainted and undrinkable
water.
Tulare County Water Works' contract with its only supplier,
Alpaugh Irrigation District, which supplies water to farmers in the
area, ends July 1. And Alpaugh Irrigation, which provides water,
recordkeeping and maintenance services to Tulare County Water
Works, is scaling back its role. The district will sell only water
as of July 1, at a monthly price of $43.50 for a household.
"We can no longer do it for $20," said Alpaugh Irrigation board
president Steve Martin. The district, which didn't increase prices
fast enough to meet the rising cost of delivering water, amassed an
estimated $330,000 power bill during the state energy crisis. Last
month, Alpaugh Irrigation customers approved a monthly fee increase
from $20 to $68.
If Tulare County Water Works wants to keep its 170 hookups
flowing, Martin said, it must also raise rates.
Tulare County Water Works can't raise prices until a July 17
election. The propertyrelated fee increase requires voter approval
under Proposition 218, a process Tulare County Water Works
officials started after they learned the outcome of Alpaugh
Irrigation's vote.
At tonight's Tulare County Water Works' informational meeting,
leaders will explain the rules. To block the possible fee increase,
51% of property owners in the district must submit protest votes in
writing. No protest vote means approval of the price jump.
But misinformation already is rampant. Sandra Meraz, Tulare
County Water Works board president, interrupted an interview
Tuesday when a screaming and crying farmworker arrived.
The farmworker thought the water was getting turned off today,
Meraz explained later.
Part of the confusion stems from Prop. 218. A section of it
calls eligible voters "owners of record." Another calls them
"tenants ... directly liable to pay the assessment, fee, or charge
in question."
Alpaugh Irrigation's board limited the voter pool to property
owners, sending each English-only notices.
There weren't enough Spanish-speaking voters to warrant
bilingual notices, Martin explained in May.
But that move left Spanish speakers and renters angry. As a
result, Chris Schneider, executive director of Central California
Legal Services, is building a lawsuit against Alpaugh
Irrigation.
The district "should have sent notices to renters in addition to
property owners," he said.
Tulare County Water Works may also come under Schneider's
fire.
The district sent notices only to property owners because "it's
a property-related fee," attorney Patrick Enright said. He's not
yet sure whether Tulare County Water Works will accept renters'
protest votes at the July 17 meeting




