



Working for Free Pays Off for Caring Lawyer
Bruce Zucker chooses to provide pro bono legal aid to poor
tenants over more prestigious work, and it has become his life's
passion.

Karima A. Haynes
Sunday, January 5, 2003
Nothing in Bruce Zucker's upbringing seems to have prepared him
for his life's work defending the poor.
A tall, athletic man who favors pleated khakis and starched
button-down shirts, Zucker grew up in an upper-middle-class enclave
in the west San Fernando Valley, far from the poverty he now sees
every day.
At Taft High School and UCLA, Zucker said, the closest brush
with poverty was reading newspaper articles about unscrupulous
bosses withholding wages from garment district workers.
Before graduating from Loyola Law School in 1993, Zucker
interviewed with a prestigious Santa Monica law firm and deftly
matched wits with the partners over lunch at an upscale restaurant.
Yet as he chatted amiably with the partners, something wasn't quite
right.
"I just didn't get the impression that they were really happy,"
Zucker said. "They seemed to be more passionate about their weekend
plans than the work they were doing."
After the meeting, Zucker realized he had to ask himself some
fundamental questions. What was his life's passion? What work would
be so satisfying that he'd do it for free?
He found the answer as he recalled his schooling. Zucker
remembered the elation he felt in law school, when he helped
resolve a landlord-tenant dispute while volunteering at a legal aid
program.
"There was no big, dramatic event in my childhood that made me
want to help poor people," Zucker said. "But it doesn't take a
bleeding heart liberal to rally behind a cause and do the right
thing."
Today, Zucker has dedicated his career to helping poor people
gain access to quality legal representation. He is a full-time
business law professor at Cal State Northridge, where in 1998 he
founded the Justice Center, a hands-on program where students earn
course credit by helping low-income people with landlord-tenant
disputes. Through the center, about 30 indigent clients a year
receive free legal help, ranging from filling out documents to
receiving representation in court.
The 35-year-old Northridge resident also serves as supervising
attorney at the Van Nuys Self-Help Legal Access Center, a two-room
office in a prefabricated building in the shadow of the Van Nuys
Courthouse where the impoverished go to resolve all manner of legal
problems.
On a recent morning at the center, a lawyer dispensed advice in
Spanish about divorce proceedings to a dozen people seated around a
conference table. A law student and a client huddled over a stack
of papers. And two female volunteers tended to people at a counter
while other clients sat at computers downloading forms from the
Internet.
Zucker, who volunteers at the center several days a week, was
recently honored for volunteering more than 150 hours in free legal
services to the poor -- more than three times the time donated by
most practicing attorneys, he said.
The State Bar of California presented Zucker with its 2002
President's Pro Bono Service Award for his volunteer work with
tenants' rights issues. The award was established in 1983 to give
statewide recognition to attorneys for providing pro bono legal
services to the poor.
Zucker was nominated by the Van Nuys center and the Ventura
County Superior Court, where he has served as a temporary judge in
Small Claims Court and has volunteered with a court-sponsored
program for at-risk high school students.
Being acknowledged by his peers was a thrill, Zucker said, but
his greatest honor comes from earning praise from his students.
"Professor Zucker is a huge advocate for the little man," said
Nicole Blackman, 21, a senior business major at Cal State
Northridge. "He is one of those people who wants to see good things
happen to good people."
The toughest challenge in defending the poor is focusing on a
case's merits and not on a client's circumstances, Zucker said.
"I am a lawyer, and my job is to protect the interests of my
client, but some cases don't have merit and I have to let them go,"
he said. "I don't take every case, but I take the clients
seriously."
On a recent morning at the Legal Access Center, Zucker sat at a
small table with Jacqueline Green, 41, of North Hollywood. The
single mother was trying to avoid being evicted.
"He is treating me like gold," Green said. "He is a kind,
nice-hearted man. He doesn't care if you are on public assistance:
He's willing to help."
Although he is doing what he loves most, Zucker said, at times,
he gets worn down by his clients' overwhelming poverty. To relieve
the burden, he frequently goes for long drives or talks shop with
his wife, Kiren Dosanjh, also an attorney and Cal State Northridge
professor.
Looking back, Zucker said he doesn't regret his decision to
dedicate his career to defending the poor.
"Someone once said, 'Get a job you love, and you'll never work a
day in your life,' " Zucker said. "I believe it's more important to
get a job you are happy with and let things flow from there."




