



Workers' aid center open today
By Holly Edwards Staff Writer
July 13, 2002
Thousands of low-income residents throughout the San Fernando
Valley face exploitation in the workplace -- overtime without pay,
long hours without breaks, earnings below the minimum wage.
Now, those workers may be able to recover what they are owed
through the Workers' Rights Self-Help Center, which opens at 9 a.m.
today at Mission College in Sylmar.
Housed in the college's campus center, the workers' rights
center will be staffed by volunteers -- college students and
attorneys from Neighborhood Legal Services, a nonprofit
organization that provides legal help to the poor. It will be open
every Saturday morning.
Those involved with the effort say the center will help workers
to learn how to stand up for their rights and students to learn
skills they can use in the workplace.
"A lot of times education is done in a vacuum, but this will
help students learn to deal with people who are upset, spot legal
issues and learn to be empathetic and still do their job," said
David Jordan, a law professor at Mission College.
"For the workers, the goal is self-empowerment through
education, and they might also decide to sign up for a night course
while they're here."
The workers' rights center is the second created by Neighborhood
Legal Services. The other center has operated at Monroe High School
in North Hills for two years and serves about 100 people each
month, said Nancy Cervantes, an attorney for Neighborhood Legal
Services.
The center is funded by a grant from the State Bar of
California. It will provide brochures, form letters seeking back
pay and other benefits, and help clients understand the law, but it
will not provide legal representation, Cervantes said.
It will also help all low-income workers, regardless of their
residency status.
"Immigration status is irrelevant," Cervantes said. "This a
place where anyone can get legal information. It's open to all
workers who have employment problems."
Cervantes said workplace abuses are widespread and occur
primarily in the garment, construction, restaurant and domestic
services businesses.
In one case she is now reviewing, she said two men who were
cousins worked for the same construction business and put in
thousands of hours of unpaid labor. One man is owed $70,000, while
the other is owed $20,000, she said.
"The most important thing is to keep track of all the hours you
work, especially if the employer doesn't provide that information,"
she said. "You don't have to have a lawyer, but you have to know
your rights."
Many of those exploited in the workplace are undocumented
residents who believe they have no rights, while others are
threatened with termination if they complain, she said.
Cervantes added that undocumented laborers have the same rights
as anyone else in the workplace, except they can't file for
unemployment benefits if fired.
"If undocumented workers didn't have rights, it would amount to
slavery," Cervantes said. "Most employers don't exploit their
workers, but there are some employers who really do take advantage
of their workers, and immigrants are more vulnerable to this
abuse."
Edgar Villatoro, a 30-year-old father of two from Van Nuys, said
he worked 100-hour weeks for a party supply business but was paid
for only 40 hours. With Cervantes' help, he said he wrote his
employer a letter demanding the money, provided an account of the
hours he worked, and just received two checks totaling more than
$3,000.
"A lot of times I worked Sunday to Sunday," Villatoro said. "But
when I asked my boss about the overtime, he told me I could walk
out the door anytime."
Cervantes said this is exactly the type of exploitation that can
be prevented through education.
"We're helping them to help themselves by knowing their rights,"
she said.



