
   
   
      
         This is a conversation between Denise Slavich and her mother, Fran Worthington, on February 16, year 2000.
         And Mom, what, what would you like to talk about today?
      
      
         Oh, when I was a little girl.
         And we'll begin at the beginning.
         I was born on May 3rd, 1937, which was shortly after the end of the Depression.
         My mother, your grandmother, was 36 years old and your grandfather, my father, was 45.
         And I was an only child, the reason being that, I know now, she was probably an RH Negative person because she had had one child stillborn, three years before I was born and miscarried in her seventh or eighth month, when I was, uh, six years before I was born.
         So the doctors told her she should never, ever try to have another child.
         And her comment was, "Watch me!"
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So, she kept trying and got pregnant with me, and carried me to full term and so, since she was, and my dad were both much older, I was a terribly spoiled brat.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         Because I was their only child and they knew I was going to be their only child and, within reason, I got just about anything I wanted that they could afford, I got.
      
      
         Oh wow!
      
      
         But, um, being an only child was sort of a lonely life, but it was interesting, because I spent a lot of time with grown-ups.
         And my mother was, never, ever knew her father.
         He died about three months before she was born.
         He was a railroad engineer, and he was working on the, down on the Pee Dee River in SC and got malaria and died.
      
      
         I never knew that.
      
      
         Yeah.
         So my grandmother, whose name was Frances, raised her children all by herself.
         My mother, whose name was Julius, she was named for her father since he died.
         Her name was Julius, which in, I mean which was not a woman's name.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         Her name was Julius Wellington Culbreth.
      
      
         That's a very masculine name.
      
      
         Yeah, exactly.
         And she was the youngest of three girls.
         And, um, then my grandmother died when I was three years old, so I never really, really knew her.
         But everyone called her Mama Frank.
      
      
         Huh.
      
      
         And that's where I got the name, \\"Mama Fran"\\ for the grandchildren to call me.
      
      
         Oh!
         I never knew that!
      
      
         Yeah.
         And I didn't think about it until the grandchildren started coming along and we were thinking about what to call people and it suddenly popped in my mind, that's what my grandmother's name was, Mama Frank.
         And I was named Frances Jeanette for both of my grandmothers.
         My father's mother was Jeanette, and she was, had died long before I was born.
         And neither one of my grandfathers were alive.
         So I never had any grandparents.
         And I really missed that.
         And my dad was the, the, uh, next to the youngest of 11 children.
         So since he was 45 when I was born, all my first cousins had children older than I was.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So I would go out and see my second cousins, not my first cousins because they were all old people as far as I was concerned.
         But when I was, I think one of my earliest recollections, was when I was three years old, Mama and Daddy and I went down to, to FL.
         And I remember, going through the lobby of the hotel where we stayed at with my bathing suit on and with one of those God-awful swim caps that everybody that you see when you look in the 40s movies and it felt like I was in a vacuum when I was walking!
         I could hear my feet in my ears!
         Going clunk, clunk, clunk!
      
      
         Was it one of the swim caps with the flowers?
      
      
         No it didn't have flowers, just the swim caps with the, the strap that hooked all the way under.
         And no matter what you did, your hair still got wet!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         I think you were supposed to be totally vacuum-proof and all that stuff!
         But it still got wet.
         But that's one of the memories I have of walking across the lobby of the hotel and going clunk, clunk, clunk as I was walking across and then going swimming.
         And another memory I have is, my mother had a terrible, severe sinus condition.
         So every summer, up until I was, probably six or seven, we spent the entire summer down at, at, uh, Carolina Beach.
         And I would get so tan!
         I mean I would just get absolutely, totally dark brown!
         And my mother would say to me, "Frances Jeanette!
         If you get any darker, they're going to make you sit in the back of the bus!"
      
      
         Oh my gosh!
      
      
         Because that was when segregation was still on and at the, uh, department stores, they had separate water fountains and separate bathrooms for colored and white.
         And when you rode on a bus, the colored had to sit in the back and the white people sat in the front.
      
      
         How did that feel?
         I mean seeing that happen?
      
      
         Normal.
         Because it was the way things were.
         I mean, that's just the way it was.
      
      
         Wow!
      
      
         And we had, a, a, uh, a colored maid who came, gosh, about twice a week, whose name was Carrie.
         And she was just like my other mother.
         She, she bathed me and played with me and took care of me.
         Even then when my mother died, she came to the funeral.
         I mean, she was just like a member of the family.
      
      
         Wow!
      
      
         But um, let's see.
         When I was four?
         1941, yeah, was when they had Pearl Harbor.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         And since we lived in Fayetteville, they decided to immediately expand Fort Bragg.
         So, um, we lived on Fort Bragg Rd, which, at that point, was the only road between Fayetteville and Fort Bragg.
         And with all the added construction and all that, from six in the morning until nine, it was bumper-to-bumper traffic on this little two-lane road going to Fort Bragg.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         From four o'clock until seven, coming back, it was bumper-to-bumper traffic, coming back from Fort Bragg.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So, you couldn't cross the street, you couldn't turn in or turn out or anything, it was just really, really crazy, because they were doing such incredible construction out there.
         And I remember all the headlights on all the cars were painted black for the first half, the first, the top semi-circle was black so that when if you went out at night, the light would shine just down on the road and not straight ahead.
         Everybody had window shades, you didn't have blinds back then, but everybody had window shades that were blackout shades and you had to pull them down at night before you turned on any of the lights, because everyone was deathly afraid that the Germans or the Japanese were going to come bomb us.
         Not that they ever did or--
      
      
         \\
         \\
      
      
         \\ --I don't think \\ they ever planned on it, but everyone was quite sure that that was going to happen.
      
      
         Looking back it almost seems silly.
      
      
         Yeah, it does but yet, yet there's, they have found evidence that there were, um, uh, submarines off the coast down in Wilmington.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         But um, you know, we were all pretty, pretty much panicked.
         And everyone, when you got chewing gum, you saved the aluminum wrapper.
         It was waxed paper with aluminum on the outside.
         You always peeled off the aluminum and made great big balls for, that was the earliest recycling.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         Everyone saved all their tin cans, um, and crushed them and put, took them to be recycled and be reused.
         There was rationing of gas, um, sugar, flour, any of, of the real, uh, staple things that a lot of people would use a lot of if they could.
         And you had a, it looked like a book of S&H green stamps.
         You got a booklet of stamps every month and several pages would be for gas, and several pages would be for flour or for butter or for, um, sugar, and you could only use X number of stamps to buy whatever you wanted to buy that, that month and then you had to wait until the next month.
         And since your dad, your, your grandfather worked for the post office, this was a critical job because he had to get the mail in and out, and he got an extra ration of gas because he had to drive back and forth to work.
      
      
         Oh, wow!
      
      
         So that was pretty special.
      
      
         Yeah.
         Now did you notice, did you have a wanting of things during that time?
      
      
         No, no.
         We had, um, we had chickens, your dad, your grandfather raised chickens, and uh, we'd always get them at Easter, well you know, dyed pink and blue and green and all that sort of thing.
         I'd get the little biddies and they'd become full-grown chickens and, uh, your grandmother would gather the eggs and sold them to a lot of her neighbors.
         We had, uh, I mean we didn't, I didn't know that I was supposedly being deprived of stuff because there was plenty to have because we had all, all of your grandfather's brothers and sisters had farms, we were the only ones that lived in the city, or the town of Fayetteville, it was the big city.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         But we'd go out and get ham and, uh, beef and, you know all that kind of thing from them.
         Sausage and pork chops and so forth and such, and any kind of fresh vegetables, so we always had food.
         And your granddaddy had a huge garden in the back and he grew, never could grow carrots, they were always awful, but he grew potatoes and collards, spinach and green beans, and those yellow crook-necked squash.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         You remember those.
      
      
         The squash and potatoes recipe.
      
      
         Exactly.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So he, he had a very successful garden and he'd go to work at probably six o'clock in the morning and he'd be home by four in the afternoon.
         He'd go out and work in the garden until dark.
         So we really didn't, I mean I wasn't aware of, of, wanting for anything.
      
      
         Except for the piano lessons.
      
      
         Oh, well, yeah because we, there was gas rationing.
         Well, to back up, when I was just learning to walk, your grandmother and grandfather told me that when we'd go down to the beach and spend the summer at the beach, back then there was no air conditioning whatsoever, and so all the, the bars and the stores and everything on the boardwalks would have screened-in, screened doors on the front.
         And any place we'd go by when I was walking with them, I'd have my hands up in the air and they'd be holding either hand--
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         --and when we'd go by any place that had a juke box playing, I had to stop and jog up and down in time to the music.
         When I was little bitty, so they knew I loved music.
         And my mother sang in the choir, and uh, in fact that's where she met Leola.
         She and Leola best friends-- first and second altos and all that, but she knew I'd probably love music, and when I first learned to walk, she said I'd walk over to the piano and reach way up and start playing the keys.
         And I never would bang; I'd play one key at a time, with one finger.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         And she'd put me up on the piano bench and would know for at least 30 or 45 minutes exactly where I was because I was sitting there playing the piano.
         So when I was four, all my little friends were going take, ballet and tap dance lessons and I wanted to, but they encouraged me to play
         take piano lessons because the piano teacher lived right around the corner and the dance teacher was all the way on the other side of town, where her dance studio was.
         So, for fifty cents and hour, I took piano lessons.
         And I went around once a week, because I could walk.
         She, Mother would cross the street with me and then I could walk to the piano teacher, whose name was, oh gosh, what was her name?
         Dorothy Russell.
         And she taught for years and years.
         I took from her until I was 15.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And I think she taught just about everybody in town who wanted to learn to play the piano because she had, she had this
         I never will forget, she had this great big Chow dog, the one, the kind with the black tongue, and I was petrified of that dog!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         She always kept him in the backyard, so I never went in the backyard.
         I'd always go in the front door there instead of going around to the back.
         I hadn't thought about that until just now, for a long time.
         But it was, it was fun playing the piano, and I, and then when I was six, no when I was five
         the next year, I was actually in the recital.
         And I couldn't play any pieces that, where the notes spanned an octave because my fingers weren't long enough until I was about nine.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         But I was in the recital and, every time, every year, it seemed like before, right before recital time I'd be out playing with somebody and fall down and skin my knees.
         And mother would make this great big, fancy dress with a real full, fluffy skirt, and she'd make a bow to match to wear on my hair, and I'd have Mercurochrome scabs on both knees.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So, she always would get real upset with me with that, but that's life.
         Because since I didn't have any brothers or sisters to play with, we lived right next door to Westlawn Elementary School, and when I started school, the bell would start ringing and I could leave the house and run across the playground and get there before it stopped.
         So I was never late.
         But I'd come home from school every afternoon and sit down and had to practice the piano for an hour, and then people would knock on the door and they'd say, "Mrs. Williams, can Frances come out to play?"
         And she'd say, "No, there, she's practicing her piano.
         Wait for another hour and then she can."
         But I played out on the, on the playground because we had swings and we had tennis courts, and, up until I was about 12, I played tackle football.
         And we had basketball goals and I played basketball with the guys, which was detrimental because at that point when you, girls basketball rules were different from boys.
         Instead of five players we had six.
         And there were three guards and three forwards.
         The guards could not cross the centerline and the forwards could not come back across the centerline either.
      
      
         Hmm.
      
      
         So you'd get the, if you were a guard, you'd get the ball and dribble.
         You had to stop at the centerline and pass it over to a forward, which was very unwieldy!
         Now they, I mean, I forget when they changed the rules, but finally they started playing by boys ' rules.
      
      
         So when you played with the boys that would mess you up for playing with the girls?
      
      
         Yeah.
         Well, I much preferred playing with the boys because I liked to dribble all the way around and go up for a lay-up or something.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         And I was, since I was tall, they always liked for, to have me on their team.
         But uh, that, that was fun, and, let's see--
      
      
         What did you guys, in, in, in your family, with a, with Grandma and Granddaddy, I mean, what kind of trips did you take when you were little?
      
      
         Oh, let's see, one time we went up to, oh, to the Skyline Dr. We went up, I re--, something, when I was about four, I think.
         We went up, your dad, your grandfather, was trying desperately to get back in the army.
         He wanted to serve and do his duty.
         He had been in WWI but he wanted to get back into the army.
         And he was 50 at this point in time, or 51.
         And we went down to Atlanta for him to talk to people down there and they told him that they couldn't do anything so if he really wanted to be in the army he needed to come back and go up to the Pentagon.
         So we drove up to Washington, and he went to the Pentagon and tried really hard for them to take him back and they said that what he was doing with the post office was in the best interest of the government and the country and he could serve much better by getting the mail to the soldiers.
         So they told him, "No," but while we were up there, it was Easter weekend and I rolled Easter eggs on the White House lawn.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And that was, that was when, uh, Roosevelt was president, and he and Mrs. Roosevelt came out and shook hands with all of us.
         All the children.
         It was really, it was an interesting experience.
      
      
         Oh, I bet.
      
      
         And then coming back, we came back through Roanoke, VA and then were on the Skyline Drive, and Daddy said, "We're going to go to Roanoke and there's Roanoke Mountain there."
         Or Roan Mountain, anyway, there's supposed to be a mountain right in the middle of Roanoke.
         So I was thinking, having looked at all my books, school books, that it was going to be like the Rockies.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         --with snow and, you know, crags, a, and rocks and all that sort of thing.
         And I was so disappointed when we got there because we drove up and up and I said, "Well where's the mountain Daddy?"
         And he said, "We're on it," and it was, of course, covered with trees and there were no rocks and there was no snow--
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         --and I was so disappointed.
         It just really burst my bubble.
         
            RECORDING PAUSED THEN CONTINUED
      
      
         Well since we were interrupted by the phone, now we're continuing.
      
      
         Yes.
      
      
         Um
         let's see, where were we?
      
      
         We were driving up Roan Mountain.
      
      
         Yeah, but then we, after we left Roanoke, we did get on the Skyline Drive and it was absolutely a beautiful, view, but there just weren't any mountains with rocks on them.
         So, that was one of the trips we took.
         A lot of times
         most, I guess most of the traveling we did was from Fayetteville down to the beach.
      
      
         Right, to Carolina Beach?
      
      
         To Carolina Beach.
         Every summer.
         And that was fun.
         And, uh, oh!
         I've got to tell you
         .
         Remember the, the birthmark I have on my leg?
         (Looks for birthmark) It's that little brown spot.
         
         Well, where is it?
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         Anyway, I have a birthmark on my leg.
      
      
         I think I remember.
      
      
         Yeah, it's just a little brown
         right there.
         (Points to birthmark)
      
      
         Yeah, yeah.
      
      
         My mother told me that it was a Coca-Cola mark.
      
      
         \\ A Coca-Cola mark?
         \\
      
      
         \\ Because \\ when she was pregnant with me, she and Daddy would go down to the beach, because, again for her sinus condition, the salt air was really good for her, and she said that Daddy would not stop because she wanted to stop and get a Coca-Cola and he wouldn't stop.
         
         And she held her hands right behind her knees, I don't know why, but just in anxiety or something so he would stop and get her a Coke.
         So she swears that little mark is a Coca-Cola mark.
         And that may be why I like Coca-Cola so well.
      
      
         You inherited the addiction?
      
      
         Yeah, yeah, I guess I did.
         But, um, growing up in Fayetteville was fun.
         It was a small town that's grown a lot since then, but we had a lot of fun with all my friends riding bicycles and, just hanging out together.
         They'd come over and we'd just hang out in the driveway and, roller- skate or play with their dogs or whatever.
         I had a little dog, a toy terrier named Fifi.
      
      
         I never knew of Fifi.
      
      
         Yeah, I got Fifi when I was, gosh, four or five, and that poor dog was one
         I put her through so much!
         I'd dress her up in doll clothes--
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         --and make her ride in, in the doll carriage, and I'd pick her up, with her front paws and make her dance with me, and we'd walk all over the place.
         I mean, she just, she was my companion because I didn't have brothers or sisters.
         And, but the only time I was really, really, um, lonely was the year that we had the polio epidemic.
         And that started, I think that was in, gosh, '46 or '47, and, uh, everybody was quarantined.
         You couldn't go, children could not go downtown, and, and this was long before Salk ever did the vaccine and with the polio epidemic, when people got Polio they had to be put in iron lungs that would breathe for them.
      
      
         Oh, wow.
      
      
         You may have seen pictures of them.
      
      
         I've heard of it.
      
      
         They were, they were great big, uh, metal tubes that opened, uh, and the only thing you could see was, uh, your head and your feet.
      
      
         Oh, wow.
      
      
         And it was pressurized so it would make you breathe in and out because they really were paralyzed.
         They called it Infantile Paralysis, or polio.
         But anyway, everybody was quarantined, we could, children had, could not go out of their own yard, they
         we couldn't go to church, couldn't go to movies, we couldn't go anywhere.
         We could ride in the car.
         I could ride in the car with, with Mother and Daddy, we'd go for a Sunday afternoon drive or something, but, I had nobody to play with.
         But fortunately, there was a, another only child girl who lived right across the street from us.
         So, her name was Joy Teeter, and she would come out on the sidewalk with her dolls and I'd come out on the sidewalk with my dolls, and we'd play dolls together across the street from each other!
      
      
         
         Across the street!
      
      
         Yeah.
      
      
         Oh, that's so sweet!
      
      
         Yeah.
         And we'd also, we'd draw hopscotch things on the, the sidewalk and play hopscotch together, and, you know, just any kind of little games we could devise.
         And we did, we'd do that for a couple hours a day.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And that was our only contact with any other child.
      
      
         How long were you quarantined?
      
      
         
         I think, it started right after school was out in May, and until school started the following September.
      
      
         Was it scary, any time you would get the sniffles, or--?
      
      
         No, I was always healthy, so nothing happened, but several people in, in town did get polio and, and had to spend time in the Iron Lung as they called it.
      
      
         Did they recover or, was it fatal?
      
      
         I think they all recovered, but a couple of them had a, a recur, recurring touch of paralysis.
         Um, you know, one boy, in particular, I remember, had a, always had a limp after that.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         So, it was, it was scary.
         And, of course, I think the pa, the parents panicked more than the children did.
         
         We were just pissed off
         because we couldn't go play with anybody else or see anybody or anything.
         That, that's the only time I really, really regretted being an only child.
      
      
         What did your parents do during that time, I mean, to make it more fun for you, or--?
      
      
         Oh, bought me lots of coloring books and, uh, Mother made clothes for my baby dolls and uh, we'd, like I said, we'd go for rides, it was a long way out from Fayetteville to Fort Bragg at the point in time, and now there's, you know, they, they're, have the same, uh, boundary, but we'd ride out and listen to, on every Sunday afternoon, the army band had a band concert.
      
      
         Like at South Park.
      
      
         Yeah, like at South Park.
         And we'd ride out and I'd have to stay in the car, but we'd ride out and Daddy would park and we'd roll down the windows so I could hear the band.
         And obviously we didn't, nobody had TV, it wasn't
         nobody had it at that point in time, so I listened to the radio a lot.
         There were, uh, The Lone Ranger and all those serial programs.
         The, The Green Hornet, and The Phantom, and Big John and Sparky, and Amos and, and Andy, and uh, Fibber McGee and Molly, and--.
         
         There were a lot of radio shows, um, uh, oh shoot, what's his name, the guy that just died not recently, not too long ago, the uh, the comic, the one who did Oh God--
      
      
         Oh, um--
      
      
         (Long pause) George Burns.
      
      
         George Burns.
      
      
         George Burns and Gracie Allen.
         They had a show.
         So there were a lot of radio shows, and I, I read a lot.
      
      
         What, yeah, what, what would you read?
      
      
         Oh, all the Nancy Drew books, and all the um, I read a lot of sports books about football and baseball, and Mother would go to the library and just bring home a whole stack of them.
         So I did a lot of reading, and, uh, playing out in the yard, I'd help, when Daddy would come home, I'd help him out in the garden.
         So, I, I really didn't lack for things to do but they just were sort of lonely things.
      
      
         Right.
         How did your mom feel about, you being a tomboy?
      
      
         She
         , well, she said I was her little girl and I was, I was Daddy's little boy.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         --or little "tomboy", because he taught me how to, he was, he was sort of a jack-of-all-trades, so he did a lot of, he built, when we had the chickens, he built the chicken houses.
         He'd bring home all the two-by-fours and the siding and the shingles and stuff, and he'd build them all himself.
         And I'd help him.
         I'd hold the ladder or whatever.
         And then I, graduated to nailing this and that and sawing this and that and so forth.
         And one time he was building a, a chicken house and I said, "Daddy, that would make a great playhouse for me."
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         And so, instead of putting it up on stilts, like he did the chicken houses, he made it into a little playhouse.
      
      
         Ooh!
      
      
         It had a door that opened and shut and locked.
         It had, uh, a window in the front, had a front porch, had a window that went up and down in the front, and a window that went up and down in the back.
         And had shelves and, it was a pretty interesting little playhouse, and I'd go, I kept all my dolls and stuff out there and I'd go out there and play for hours, and all my, friends would come over and we'd have such fun, and we'd had a couple of little rocking chairs and we sat out on the front porch.
      
      
         Oh, that's sweet.
      
      
         It was, it was a neat little playhouse.
         When we sold the house, the people that bought it had children, and they were just delighted because they had somewhere for their kids to play.
         And something else you probably don't know
         .
         The house that we lived in on Fort Bragg Road, was, um, very modern for it's time and had two bathrooms.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And not too many houses built back then had two.
         But it was a two-story house, and on the front, on the first level, you'd come in the front door.
         On the left was a living room with a fireplace.
         On the right was a dining room and there were stairs going upstairs between that.
         And behind the dining room was a little, small room that they called a breakfast room, which was just because they had a wall between that and the kitchen.
         And there was a kitchen.
         Behind the living room was another room that we could, today we call them `dens,' but back then they called them, `sitting rooms.
         ' Then it had a wrap-around, um, screened-in porch--
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         --and a bathroom between the sitting room and the kitchen was a bathroom and also the door to the stairs to go down to the basement, because we had a coal-fired furnace.
         And then upstairs there were two huge rooms, one on either side of the house and a bath at the top of the stairs.
         So when they completed all the, um, building out at Fort Bragg and brought in so many troops, every Sunday when we went to church, Mother and Daddy would bring home at least one, and usually two, GIs who were there in their uniforms and looked very forlorned; they would bring them home for Sunday dinner.
      
      
         Oh that's nice!
      
      
         And finally, um, Daddy converted the whole upstairs into two efficiency apartments.
         So one bedroom had a stove and a refrigerator and they had to share the bath.
         And, well, each, each of the bedrooms had the separate stove and refrigerator and they shared a bath.
         And we would rent them to couples who were just going to be there while their husbands were going through training.
         And that was interesting!
         So
         they turned the, the dining room into Mama and Daddy's bedroom and the breakfast room was my bedroom--
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         --which was just about big enough for a bed and that was about it.
         But that was fun for me because I had somebody else to talk to.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         And a couple of, of the families that lived there had a couple of children, if you could imagine four people sleeping, sleeping in one room.
      
      
         That would be tight!
      
      
         It was!
         It was necessary because the guys were going off to war and the, their wives didn't know when or if they would ever see them again.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         So they absolutely thought that every minute was precious.
         And for years and years afterwards we heard from these people.
         The sent Christmas cards and would write--
      
      
         Oh.
      
      
         It was just really nifty.
         And, um, something else I remember was, and you've probably seen this in the movies.
         Everybod y who had someone in the service had a star in their window so you'd always know.
         And then if, I think there were with a cer, a certain color, maybe a red background, and if, if the, the military member was liked, it became a white background.
         Something like that: I can't remember which colors there were, but there was a distinction.
      
      
         Yeah.
         I've heard of yellow ribbons.
      
      
         No.
         That was way longer
         , that was, "Tie a Yellow Ribbon `Round the--"
      
      
         
            Right.
      
      
         That was a long time after that.
         But everybody had
         , they called them `Victory Stars' or `Service Stars.
         ' And if you see any movies that were, well in, Saving Private Ryan, and when they were showing houses, uh, people back in the States, they had the stars.
         You probably didn't recognize or even know what it meant.
      
      
         Oh.
         I haven't seen it yet.
      
      
         Oh.
         OK.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         Well, when you see it, when they show the stateside houses, you'll see the stars in the windows and that means that they have, how, how, many people they have in the service.
      
      
         Ooh.
      
      
         But, um, let's see.
         What else do you want to know?
      
      
         Hmm
         
         
      
      
         Did you know about me winning the piano competition?
      
      
         No!
      
      
         When I was, we sold the house, uh, on Fort Bragg Road and moved over to Circle Dr. And your grandmother was, she had a, had a, heart condition.
         I'm sure it was a congenital something or other because she always had to, to rest in the afternoon.
         She was never very, very healthy.
      
      
         I knew she died when you were young.
      
      
         Yeah, And, um, when I was 12, in October, when I was 12, she had a, stroke, or actually a blood clot and it went to her brain.
         It partially paralyzed her right side.
         And I was practicing the piano, doing all that sort of thing, and my teacher entered me into the competition for Classical Music for 16 and under.
      
      
         Wow!
      
      
         For the whole, for the state of NC.
      
      
         What an honor!
      
      
         And the competition was down in Wilmington and it was on the 17th of March, The Ides of March, and so, uh, she drove me down there, and, at that point Mother had had a stroke and was back in the hospital.
         So I went down and I played.
         And I won.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         I was 12 years old and I won 16 and under for the whole state of NC, Classical Competition.
      
      
         What'd you play?
      
      
         Ooh,
         I can't even remember.
         I've got in this vault something or other.
         I can still play it.
         But it was fairly complicated.
         And I was, nervous and all that sort of thing, but anyway I won.
         And we got back to Fayetteville and, I went, the, the teacher took me to the hospital and I went up to see, and Daddy was there, he'd gotten off work and was there, and mother had slipped, she was sort of in and out of a coma and I told him I had won.
         And he went in and told her, and she regained consciousness enough to say, "I am so proud!"
      
      
         Oh my God!
      
      
         And, she died two days later.
      
      
         What a great thing that, you know, she came back long enough to--
      
      
         Yeah, exactly.
      
      
         --to know that.
      
      
         Exactly.
      
      
         Wow!
         That's powerful!
      
      
         And I was, I was really proud of that!
         I still have the little cup.
         I think on of the handles is broken off of it.
         But I still have it!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         But I was pretty proud of that!
         And then
         I discovered boys and I didn't want to play the piano as much any more!
         
      
      
         Because Daddy had delusions that I would even go to Juilliard or Eastman School of Music.
      
      
         But hormones just kind of--
      
      
         Hormones kind of interfered, yeah.
         I wasn't dedicated enough to practice four, five or six hours every night.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         But I had a good time with my piano!
         I played for all of the, the groups in the Glee Club and the Choral Group in all the little ensembles on school.
      
      
         Yeah?
         
         What kind of clubs were you in?
      
      
         Um, let's see
         .
         I was in the Tri-High Y, which is, I have, no idea, they probably don't even exist anymore, the High Y was for boys and the Tri-High Y was for girls.
         And I was in the National Honor Society, and I was in, the Glee Club and everything that went along with that.
         Um, when I took Spanish, I was in the Spanish Club.
         I was on the, um, the staff of the school newspaper; wrote a column for them.
         And, let's see, what else was I
         oh, I was in the Methodist Youth Fellowship in church, the MYF.
         And that's about it.
      
      
         So you were pretty busy!
      
      
         Yeah, I was.
         And I was, when I graduated from high school, I was Valedictorian and I also won the um, what the heck did they call it?
         The business, I think it was a business award, no, commercial award for being number one in the shorthand and typing classes.
         And I got that gold bracelet that I have, I was awarded for that.
         But back to, back to my birth mother, Julius, everybody called her Judy except for Daddy, he called her Julius.
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         But she died in, in, gosh, 1951?
         Yeah, I was 12 years old, and, she died, then I was 13 May after she died.
         And that summer, her best friend was Leola Harvey.
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         And so that summer Leola's sister, Lucille, whose husband had died three years before, came down from Richmond to visit for her annual summer visit.
         She came down and stayed usually a couple of months, all summer.
         And she and Leola, Leola brought her over to see Daddy for a condolence call, and sparks flew and they started going out and that's when they decided to get married and she became my stepmom.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And they got married in October after my mother died in March.
         Which at that point was highly, highly incensing!
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         I mean, you just, you had to mourn for a year.
         And I mean it was scandalous!
         So she had a lot of talk going on about her when she married Daddy and came down to Fayetteville.
         And, um, cried a lot about it because some people were very spiteful to her.
      
      
         It's hard to imagine grandmother being seen as a tart!
      
      
         Yea, yeah!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         But I mean, and, you know, she had the best intentions and I really needed a mother.
         I was 12, 13 years old, and I needed a woman, and there was even talk of putting me in a foster home or in an orphanage because it was scandalous that I was a young girl living alone with my father!
      
      
         Uh-huh.
      
      
         Which, I mean, in 1951, yeah.
         But today there's nothing wrong with it.
         So Daddy was I think, he loved her a lot, but she also answered a lot of his prayers for how to take care of me and deal with me.
         Because I had just started my period, and I was, you know, having acne and he didn't know how to deal with all that stuff!
      
      
         
            
         
      
      
         So he needed a woman to take care of me.
         And she was very glamorous and wore gorgeous clothes and dressed beautifully!
         And she taught me a lot and did a lot for me.
      
      
         Wow.
      
      
         And because my birth mother Judy was 5'2", and weighed about 145.
         So she was short and chubby.
         Sweetheart!
         A wonderful woman but it had, she and Leola had a lot of fun together and, but she was not classy.
      
      
         Right.
      
      
         She was a little country girl.
         Born and raised down in Cumberland County.
         Never lived anywhere else.
         And here was Lucille from the big city of Richmond--
         --Who wore high heels and stocking with the black seams up the back, and hats and had jewelry to go with every outfit and all that sort of thing.
         So, I mean, she just really swept daddy off his feet!
         And he was just absolutely, astounded by her because she was so incredible.
         And she entertained for him and, taught me a lot.
         She was just a great, great lady!
         And had always wanted a daughter, so there I was.
         And when they got married I was her only attendant and, her son, Alvin, was daddy's best man.
      
      
         That's sweet!
      
      
         Yeah.
         And Uncle Harmon gave her away.
      
      
         Hmm.
         I didn't know that.
      
      
         Yeah.
         So, what else?
      
      
         I think that's all.
      
      
         OK.
         Then turn off the tape.
      
      
         OK.
         Thanks for talking with me.
      
      
         You're welcome!
         My pleasure!
      
   
