
  
    
      
        Introduction
        Alzheimer disease is the leading cause of dementia among the elderly and is
        characterized by accumulation of extracellular and vascular amyloid in the brain [1].
        Amyloid deposits are composed of the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ), a 4-kDa peptide released
        during “amyloidogenic” proteolytic processing of the Alzheimer Aβ precursor protein (APP)
        [2]. APP can also be cleaved by the nonamyloidogenic α-secretases, a disintegrin and
        metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM-10) and ADAM-17 [3], in a reaction that is believed to occur
        primarily on the plasma membrane [4] and is known as “ectodomain shedding.”
        α-Secretase-type ectodomain shedding divides the Aβ domain of APP, thereby generating
        α-secretase-cleaved soluble APP ectodomain (sAPP
        α ) [4]. This reaction can be stimulated by activation of protein kinase
        C (PKC) or extracellular-signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) [5,6,7] or by inactivation
        of protein phosphatase 1 or 2A [5].
        Reports from retrospective analyses suggest that the statin class of
        cholesterol-lowering HMGCoA reductase inhibitors may lower the risk for Alzheimer disease
        by as much as 70% [8,9,10,11]. Studies in wild-type guinea pigs and in plaque-forming
        transgenic mice have demonstrated that chronic statin treatment can attenuate cerebral
        amyloidosis [12,13], suggesting that statins may exert their risk-reducing effects, at
        least in part, by modulating APP metabolism. In cell culture, lovastatin and simvastatin
        decrease the release of Aβ by rat hippocampal neurons [12,14] while activating
        α-secretase-type ectodomain shedding [15,16]. However, the molecular mechanisms by which
        statins modulate ectodomain shedding remain to be elucidated [17,18].
        Statin effects on APP metabolism are, to some extent, attributable to cholesterol
        lowering, but statin actions on APP may also involve cholesterol-independent actions [19].
        Reduction in synthesis of mevalonate leads to decreased generation of a number of
        isoprenoid lipid derivatives. Isoprenoids, such as farnesyl pyrophosphate and
        geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, are 15- or 20-carbon lipid moieties. Through the action of
        farnesyl transferases and type I geranylgeranyl transferases, isoprenoids are attached to
        the amino acid sequence Cys-Ala-Ala-Xaa (“CAAX”) at the C-terminus of the Rho family of
        GTPases [20]. These posttranslational lipid modifications are essential for attachment of
        the GTPases to the cytosolic face of intracellular vesicles and/or to the cytosolic leaflet
        of the plasma membrane, thereby specifying subcellular targets for GTPase action(s).
        Some members of the Rho GTPase family exert their actions through modulation of protein
        kinase activities. One of the best characterized is Rho-associated protein kinase 1 (ROCK1,
        also called ROKβ). ROCK1 is a serine/threonine kinase with an apparent mass of 160 kDa that
        can be activated by either RhoA or RhoB [21,22,23]. Structurally, the ROCK1 N-terminus
        contains the protein kinase domain, while the C-terminus has both a Rho-binding domain and
        a pleckstrin homology domain, either of which can modulate protein–protein interactions. In
        the inactive state, the Rho-binding domain and the pleckstrin homology domain form an
        autoinhibitory loop by binding and blocking the kinase domain at the N-terminus of the
        molecule. Activation of ROCK1 occurs when a Rho protein binds to the Rho-binding domain,
        causing a conformational change that opens the kinase domain for the phosphorylation of
        downstream effectors [23]. Once activated, ROCK1 phosphorylates several substrates,
        including myosin light chain phosphatase, LIM kinases (Lin11, Isl1, and Mec3), and
        ezrin-radixin-moesin proteins [24,25,26,27]. ROCK1 has recently been implicated in
        modifying the site of substrate cleavage by APP γ-secretase [28], perhaps acting via
        ROCK1-dependent phosphorylation of a component of the γ-secretase enzyme complex.
        In the current study, we demonstrate that activation of sAPP
        α shedding from cultured cells by atorvastatin or simvastatin involves
        isoprenoid-mediated protein phosphorylation. Treatment of cells with a farnesyl transferase
        inhibitor or expression of a dominant negative (DN) ROCK1 molecule led to enhanced sAPP
        α shedding, supporting the notion that shedding is modulated by the
        isoprenoid pathway. Transfection with the cDNA for a constitutively active (CA) ROCK1
        molecule led to inhibition of statin-activated sAPP
        α shedding. These results raise the possibility that the apparent
        beneficial effect of statins in the prevention of Alzheimer disease could be, at least in
        part, mediated by isoprenoid modulation of APP metabolism.
      
      
        Methods
        
          Reagents
          The APP C-terminal specific polyclonal antibody 369 [29] was used to detect
          full-length APP and its C-terminal fragments. Monoclonal antibody 6E10 against residues
          1–16 of human Aβ (Signet, Dedham, Massachusetts, United States) was used to detect human
          holoAPP or sAPP
          α . Anti-ROCK1 antibody was purchased from Chemicon (Temecula,
          California, United States). Streptavidin-antibody HRP-conjugated C-Myc antibody 9E10,
          mevalonic acid, arachidonic acid, and phenylarsine oxide were purchased from Sigma (St.
          Louis, Missouri, United States). Atorvastatin was obtained from Pfizer (Groton,
          Connecticut, United States), and simvastatin was obtained from LKT Labs (St. Paul,
          Minnesota, United States). N2 supplement was obtained from Gibco (Carlsbad, California,
          United States). Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, Illinois, United
          States). CA and DN Myc-tagged ROCK1 vectors were generated as previously described
          [30,31] and were generous gifts from Liqun Luo (Stanford University). Fugene 6 was
          purchased from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Farnesyl transferase inhibitor 1 (FTI-1) was
          obtained from Biomol (Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania, United States). Tumor necrosis
          factor α (TNFα) protease inhibitor 2 and Y-27632 were purchased from Calbiochem (San
          Diego, California, United States). Protein concentration assay kit was purchased from
          Biorad (Hercules, California, United States). LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay Kits
          and Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kits were purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene,
          Oregon, United States).
        
        
          Culture Methods and Sample Preparation
          N2a mouse neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with the Swedish mutant form of APP
          (SweAPP N2a cells; APP695, 595–596 KM/NL) (gift from G. Thinakaran and S. Sisodia,
          University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States) were maintained in DMEM, 10%
          FBS, and 200 μg/ml G418 in the presence of penicillin and streptomycin [32]. For the 24 h
          prior to pharmacological treatments, the culture media were changed to N2-supplemented
          lipid-free medium. In some studies, cells were transfected in N2-supplemented FBS-free
          medium 48 h before pharmacological treatments. Transfections were carried out using the
          Fugene reagent, according to the manufacturer's instructions. All treatments were
          performed in the presence of 1 μM mevalonic acid, unless otherwise specified.
          Cells were lysed in 1% Triton-X/PBS buffer containing 1 X complete proteinase
          inhibitor cocktail (Roche), sonicated twice for 30 s, and centrifuged at 5,000
          g for 5 min. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined
          using the Biorad Protein Assay kit, following the manufacturer's instructions. For the
          detection of holoAPP and sAPP
          α , samples were separated in 7.5% polyacrylamide gels, transferred to
          nitrocellulose, and the proteins detected with either 369 (1:3,000 for holoAPP and
          C-terminal fragments) or 6E10 (1:1,000 for holoAPP or sAPP
          α ), followed by incubation of the transfers with appropriate
          secondary anti-rabbit or anti-mouse antibodies. For the detection of transfected ROCK1
          proteins, samples were immunoprecipitated with 2 μg of anti-Myc antibody, separated in 5%
          polyacrylamide gels, transferred, and the proteins detected with anti-ROCK1 antibody
          (1:1,000 dilution).
        
        
          Cell-Surface Biotinylation
          Cells were plated in a 100-mm dish at a concentration of 5 × 10
          6 cells/dish. After treatment, media were harvested, and sAPP
          α levels were evaluated by immunoblotting as described above. Cells
          were washed twice in PBS and then incubated with Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin for 30 min at 4 
          o C. Biotinylation reactions were terminated by one wash in Tris
          followed by two washes in PBS. Cells were lysed in 1% Triton-X/PBS buffer containing
          protease inhibitor cocktail as indicated above. Lysates were immunoprecipitated with 3 μl
          of whole 369 antibody serum and 30 μl of protein A beads. After washing twice with 1%
          Triton/PBS, and then twice with PBS, samples were boiled in sample buffer for 3 min,
          separated in a 7.5% polyacrylamide gel, and transferred to nitrocellulose. The
          biotinylated proteins were detected using streptavidin HRP polymer (1:10,000
          dilution).
        
        
          Viability/Cytotoxicity Assays
          Cells were plated in an eight-well slide at a concentration of 1 × 10
          4 cells/well. After treatments as indicated, LIVE/DEAD assays were
          performed following the manufacturer's instructions (Molecular Probes).
        
        
          Cholesterol Assays
          Cholesterol levels in cell lysates were measured using Amplex Red following the
          manufacturer's instructions (Molecular Probes). We have previously demonstrated that
          standard doses of either simvastatin or atorvastatin reduce cholesterol levels in N2a
          cells by 65%–67% [16].
        
        
          Quantification and Statistical Analysis
          Quantification of protein bands was performed using the UVP Bioimaging System, and
          statistical analysis was performed on paired observations using the Student's 
          t test.
        
      
      
        Results
        
          Atorvastatin Activates sAPPα Shedding at a Subcellular Site Upstream of Endocytosis
          from the Plasma Membrane
          We confirmed our previous observation [16] that atorvastatin produces an increase in
          sAPP
          α shedding that is dose-dependent, reaching a maximum effect at 5 μM.
          The increase in sAPP
          α shedding is accompanied by a corresponding increase in levels of the
          nonamyloidogenic APP α-C-terminal fragment (C83; data not shown).
          In order to refine our localization of the subcellular target of statin action, we
          evaluated the steady-state levels of cell-surface APP (csAPP) in the absence or presence
          of statins. After drug treatments, cells were subjected to the surface biotinylation
          protocol. Cells and media were harvested, and levels of sAPP
          α , holoAPP, and csAPP were measured. Treatment with atorvastatin
          increased csAPP by approximately 1.6-fold, similar to the effect of the drug on holoAPP
          (Figure 1), while sAPP
          α shedding was increased by approximately 7-fold (
          p < 0.05). Since csAPP levels were only slightly raised in the same
          statin-treated cells in which sAPP
          α shedding was dramatically increased, we interpret this disparity to
          indicate that the effector of statin-stimulated shedding is probably intrinsic to the
          plasma membrane. In other studies, the plasma membrane has been proposed to be, or to
          contain, the statin target. For example, statins have been proposed to cause
          co-localization of α-secretase and APP within lipid rafts [15,33]; statins might also
          induce modification of the structure and activity of a protein in the plasma membrane
          α-secretase complex, perhaps in an action similar to how statins bind and “lock”
          cell-surface integrins [34].
          A pulse-chase protocol was also used to study post-transcriptional regulation of APP
          metabolsm by statins (data not shown). This protocol avoids any confound that might arise
          because of altered APP transcription. Pulse-chase studies were performed using a 10-min
          pulse with [
          35 S]methionine followed by various chase times from 0 to 120 min.
          Typical maturation and half-life of mature cellular holoAPP were observed, as was
          subsequent release of sAPP
          α [5,29]. In the presence of either atorvastatin or simvastatin, the
          time course of maturation and release perfectly paralleled that observed in the absence
          of either drug, except that the fractional content of cellular mature holoAPP was
          approximately 2-fold greater in the presence of drug (i.e., at 15 or 75 min chase, mature
          APP in the presence of statin was approximately 310% of the level of immature APP at 
          t = 0 versus a control [vehicle treatment] of 150% of the level of
          immature APP at 
          t = 0; also, at 
          t = 30 min, the relative percent values for drug versus vehicle were
          380% and 200%, respectively). Fold increases in released sAPP
          α in the same experiments were approximately 3- to 4-fold (2.0
          arbitrary units versus 5.5–8.0 arbitrary units at 120 min for atorvastatin and
          simvastatin, respectively). Secretory maturation toxicity is one possible mechanism for
          elevated levels of intracellular mature holoAPP and causes retarded conversion of mature
          holoAPP to sAPP
          α . This pattern was not observed following statin treatment,
          excluding maturation toxicity as a mechanism underlying the altered levels of mature
          cellular holoAPP.
          Instead, the pattern that we observed raises the possibility that statins, presumably
          via isoprenoids (given the reversibility with mevalonate), as discussed in the next
          section, may alter sorting of cellular holoAPP, diverting holoproteins away from terminal
          degradation in the endosomal/lysosomal pathway and into the constitutive secretory
          pathway that generates sAPP
          α . However, the fold effect on reduced intracellular turnover in the
          endosomal/lysosomal pathway (or sorting out of the endosomal/lysosomal pathway and into
          the constitutive secretory/shedding pathway) is apparently insufficient to explain the
          fold effect on sAPP
          α generation (2-fold for the former, vs 3- to 4-fold for the latter),
          indicating a contribution from a downstream site in the processing pathway. When these
          results are taken together with independent work on regulated shedding of transforming
          growth factor α (TGFα) [35,36], a parsimonious explanation is that an important target
          for activation of ectodomain shedding is probably located at the plasma membrane or
          downstream of APP residence at the plasma membrane.
          The identification of the regulatory components of the ectodomain shedding machinery
          have been long-sought in other studies employing phorbol esters to stimulate shedding of
          sAPP
          α or TGFα [4,35,36,37]. Munc-13 has recently been implicated as a
          phorbol target in regulated shedding [38]. In our opinion, this molecule is rather
          unlikely to play a major role in shedding regulation, given the specificity of Munc-13
          effects for phorbols and the generalization of the regulated shedding phenomenon to
          include activation by protein phosphatase inhibitors and neurotransmitters. Neither of
          these would be predicted to act via the phorbol-binding C1 domain of Munc-13.
          Sisodia and colleagues [39] demonstrated that arrest of APP endocytosis from the
          plasma membrane by deletion of its 
          NPXY clathrin-coated vesicle targeting sequence [40,41] can
          dramatically stimulate sAPP
          α shedding, presumably by extending the half-life of co-localized
          α-secretase and APP on the plasma membrane. In order to exclude the possible contribution
          of altered endocytosis to statin-stimulated shedding, we evaluated the effect of
          phenylarsine oxide (PO), an inhibitor of endocytosis, on statin-stimulated shedding
          (Figure 2). Treatment with either atorvastatin, simvastatin, or PO alone increased sAPP
          α shedding, as expected. Co-treatment of cells with PO plus either
          atorvastatin or simvastatin caused stimulation of sAPP
          α shedding to levels greater than the maximal levels of shedding
          achievable with inhibition of endocytosis using PO alone or with maximal doses of either
          statin alone (
          p < 0.05). The additivity of statin- and PO-stimulated shedding is
          consistent with the hypothesis that statins act at or near the plasma membrane, prior to
          internalization of csAPP. Under all circumstances, stimulated sAPP
          α shedding was completely blocked using TNFα protease inhibitor 2, a
          standard α-secretase/metalloproteinase inhibitor (Figure 2). We interpret this as an
          indication that the statin-induced α-cleavage of APP is probably mediated by one of the
          molecules usually associated with the phenomenon, i.e., ADAM-10 or ADAM-17 [16].
        
        
          Compounds that Modulate Isoprenoid Levels Activate sAPPα Shedding
          As discussed above, there is an established relationship between statins and
          isoprenoid-modulated protein phosphorylation. We therefore tested the effects of FTI-1 on
          statin-stimulated sAPP
          α shedding. FTI-1 increased the shedding of sAPP
          α , but the combination of a statin plus FTI-1 increased sAPP
          α shedding to levels greater than those achievable by using either
          compound alone (Figure 3; 
          p < 0.05). In the same experiment, levels of holoAPP were modestly
          increased but, again, to an extent insufficient to account for the increase in shed sAPP
          α (Figure 3).
          To test whether statin-activated shedding might be attributable to a metabolite
          downstream of HMGCoA reductase, cells were treated with 1 μM simvastatin, 5 μM FTI-1, and
          a series of concentrations of mevalonic acid. Since FTI-1 acts downstream of HMGCoA
          reductase, the stimulatory effect of FTI-1 on sAPP
          α shedding would not be predicted to be modified by mevalonate
          supplementation. Low doses (<1 μM) of mevalonic acid did not affect statin-induced
          sAPP
          α shedding, but complete inhibition of statin-activated sAPP
          α shedding was achieved with higher doses of mevalonic acid (100 μM).
          As predicted, the shedding observed following treatment with FTI-1 was not inhibited by
          any of the concentrations of mevalonic acid tested (Figure 4). These data are consistent
          with a role for isoprenoids in statin control of APP metabolism in cultured cells.
        
        
          Expression of ROCK-Related Molecules Modulates sAPPα Shedding in a Bidirectional
          Manner
          Since many isoprenoid-mediated Rho effects converge on ROCKs, we next transfected N2a
          cells with cDNAs encoding either green fluorescent protein (GFP) (control), CA ROCK1, or
          DN ROCK1 (Figure 5). Simvastatin caused a typical activation of sAPP
          α shedding from GFP-transfected cells. When CA ROCK1 was introduced,
          however, shedding of sAPP
          α from both untreated and simvastatin-treated cells was diminished
          (Figure 5; 
          p < 0.05 versus GFP control). Conversely, DN ROCK1 alone activated
          shedding of sAPP
          α . Cellular levels of holoAPP were not affected by transfection
          (Figure 5; 
          p < 0.05 versus GFP control). In studies aimed at independent
          confirmation of the involvement of ROCK activation in sAPP
          α shedding, we treated SweAPP N2a cells with arachidonic acid, an
          activator of ROCK. As shown in Figure 6, arachidonic acid reduced the shedding of sAPP
          α without altering levels of holoAPP. Based on this series of results,
          we concluded that both basal and activated sAPP
          α shedding from cultured cells are controlled by ROCK activity.
          In some experiments, cells were treated with Y-27632 (10 nM to 50 μM), a compound that
          can inhibit ROCKs. Y-27632 showed no effect on basal sAPP
          α release and blocked statin-activated sAPP
          α shedding (data not shown). This result was unexpected in light of
          the effects of DN ROCK1. Given the internally consistent actions of DN ROCK1 and CA
          ROCK1, as well as the results employing either FTI-1 or arachidonate, we concluded that
          the Y-27632 result might be due to inhibition by Y-27632 of protein kinases other than
          ROCK1 [23]. The possibility was also considered that cytotoxicity of Y-27632 for the
          central vacuolar pathway might explain the disparity between the effects of DN ROCK1 and
          those of Y-27632, but neither impairment of intracellular APP maturation nor increased
          apoptosis as measured by LIVE/DEAD assay were apparent following Y-27632 treatment (data
          not shown). Ultimately, we were unable to document any explanation for the disparate
          results of Y-27632 and DN ROCK1.
        
      
      
        Discussion
        The isoprenoid pathway involves lipid modification of various members of the Rho family
        of small GTPases by the addition of either farnesyl or geranylgeranyl moieties [20,42].
        Isoprenylation serves to target the GTPases to the proper organelle membrane, where their
        actions often relate to cytoskeletal dynamics and/or vesicle trafficking [20,42]. ROCKs are
        important downstream targets of Rho (Figure 7), catalyzing the phosphorylation of effector
        phosphoprotein substrates [23]. The foregoing data indicate that statin-induced activation
        of APP shedding in cultured cells involves the Rho/ROCK pathway. More specifically, the
        data indicate that ROCK1 activation blocks the effects of statins on APP ectodomain
        shedding, while ROCK1 blockade alone can mimic the effect of statins on APP shedding. By
        extension, these data predict that application of statins to neurons might directly or
        indirectly inhibit ROCK1 activity. Evaluation of this possibility will be the subject of
        future investigation.
        The first evidence that APP might be a substrate for ectodomain shedding was provided by
        Weidemann et al. [43] who identified sAPP
        α in the cerebrospinal fluid and blood. This aspect of APP metabolism
        bears resemblance to the proteolytic signal transduction pathways involved in processing
        pro-TGFα [35,36] and Notch [44]. In the case of Notch, the process is set in motion by the
        binding of a ligand to the Notch ectodomain, triggering its release (shedding). For APP,
        intracellular signal transduction appears to be more important [2,29,45]. In early studies,
        the existence of the shed ectodomain of APP was used to deduce the existence of the
        proteolytic activity designated α-secretase, which has the unusual specificity of cleaving
        its substrates at a proscribed distance from the extracellular leaflet of the plasma
        membrane [4,39]. Ultimately, the integral cell-surface metalloproteinases ADAM-10 and
        ADAM-17/TACE were found to underlie α-secretase-type ectodomain shedding [3,46].
        Why is APP a substrate for ectodomain shedding? To answer this question requires
        contemplation of the physiological function of APP. APP is a type 1 integral protein that
        is subjected to a host of post-translational processing events, including N- and
        O-glycosylation, tyrosyl sulfation, phosphorylation, and proteolysis [39,43,47,48]. Most
        (60%–80%) newly synthesized APP is subjected to terminal intracellular degradation that
        generates no discrete fragments [5]. A smaller fraction of APP molecules (approximately 20%
        in PC12 cells under basal conditions [5]) undergoes ectodomain shedding catalyzed by either
        the α-secretase (nonamyloidogenic) or β-secretase (potentially amyloiodgenic) pathway. When
        PKC is activated, the stoichiometry of shed sAPP
        α rises from 2 mol shed per 10 mol synthesized to 4 mol shed per mole
        synthesized. Most of this shedding is catalyzed by the α-secretase pathway, but a trace
        amount (<5% [49]) is catalyzed by β-secretase/β-site APP cleaving enzyme [50]. sAPP
        α and sAPP
        β differ by the inclusion in sAPP
        α of the first 16 residues of Aβ. Unlike sAPP
        α , which is generated at the plasma membrane, most sAPP
        β is probably generated by cleavage within the 
        trans -Golgi network and endocytic pathway vesicles. HoloAPP levels are
        likely limiting at one or more sorting steps in the late secretory pathway, since activated
        sAPP
        α shedding is apparently accompanied by diminished generation of sAPP
        β [51].
        What is the function of shed sAPP
        α ? Again, from other molecules, we know that shedding can serve
        important cellular functions by releasing diffusible ligands from their membrane-bound
        precursors (e.g., TGFα and TNFα) or by terminating intercellular signaling (e.g., Notch). A
        popular model holds that sAPP
        α may function as a neurotrophic and/or neuroprotective factor, and may
        promote neurite outgrowth [52]. More recent evidence suggests that released APP derivatives
        modulate efficacy of neurotransmission at the synapse [53]. Targeted deletion of APP has
        not revealed a striking phenotype [54], presumably because of functional redundancy
        supplied by APP-like proteins [55]. Mice with double and triple null mutations in various
        combinations of APP, APP-like protein 1, and APP-like protein 2 are now being created, in
        search of evidence for a definitive function for APP.
        Cao and Sudhof [56] have recently discovered that the APP C-terminal fragment generated
        by α- or β-secretase is itself cleaved to release Aβ and an APP intracellular domain (AICD)
        that diffuses into the nucleus, possibly acting there as a transcription factor. The
        pathway leading to AICD must be initiated by ectodomain shedding: holoAPP cannot directly
        give rise to AICD. Therefore, one important function for α- and/or β-secretase processing
        of APP may be the eventual generation of AICD. Our results suggest that Rho/ROCK signaling
        provides modulation of basal and stimulated α-secretase activity. It will now be important
        to dissect pathways upstream of Rho/ROCK signaling in order to identify the intracellular
        and intercellular events that participate in Rho/ROCK regulation of α-secretase under
        physiological and pathological conditions.
        The potential role of cholesterol in α-secretase-mediated shedding was discovered by
        Bodovitz and Klein [57] who used β-cyclodextrin to lower cellular cholesterol. Kojro et al.
        [15] confirmed this observation, using not only β-cyclodextrin but also lovastatin to lower
        cellular cholesterol. These investigators proposed that elevated ADAM-10 activity and
        protein levels contributed to these effects. These basic observations dovetailed with
        emerging epidemiological evidence that administration of statins might lead to a diminished
        incidence of Alzheimer disease [8,9,10,11]. Despite this, however, the association of
        statins and cholesterol levels with activated α-secretase-mediated shedding of the APP
        ectodomain was unexpected and not readily explicable by existing knowledge regarding
        regulation of α-secretase activity. The best characterized regulation of α-secretase
        processing typically involves protein phosphorylation via PKC [5,29] or ERKs [7] or protein
        dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase 1 or 2A [29]. We recently excluded the possibility
        that either PKC or ERK plays a role in statin-activated shedding [16], raising the
        possibility that other protein phosphorylation signaling pathways might link statins and/or
        cholesterol to α-secretase activation.
        Maillet et al. [58] implicated the Rho pathway in modulation of α-secretase activity
        while dissecting the activated shedding process that accompanies serotonergic signal
        transduction. These investigators discovered that Rap1 acts through Rac to modulate
        α-secretase processing of APP. Soon thereafter, ROCK1 was discovered by Zhou et al. [28] to
        modulate a downstream processing step in APP metabolism that involves
        presenilin/γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis of APP C-terminal fragments C99 and C83. These
        investigators discovered that activation of ROCK1 may account for how nonsteroidal
        anti-inflammatory drugs specify the scissile bond within the APP transmembrane domain that
        is cleaved by presenilin/γ-secretase to generate the C-terminus of Aβ. Based on these
        reports, we asked whether the Rho/ROCK pathway might play a role in controlling shedding of
        sAPP
        α following statin application.
        CA ROCK1 and DN ROCK1 molecules yielded direct and complementary evidence that ROCK1 was
        indeed a candidate for modulation of statin-activated α-secretase action. Further, we were
        able to demonstrate that α-secretase activity could be modulated by molecules further
        upstream in the isoprenoid pathway (see Figure 7). FTI-1, an inhibitor of farnesyl
        transferase also known as L-744,832 [59], mimicked and potentiated statin-activated
        shedding, presumably by blocking transfer of isoprenoid moieties to a Rho protein by
        farnesyl transferase, and thereby decreasing Rho activity. However, FTI-1 treatment can
        also increase the level of geranylgeranylated isoforms of certain Rho proteins, e.g., the
        inhibitory geranylgeranylated RhoB protein [60]. In further support of a role for
        isoprenoids, we were able to demonstrate that supplementation of cells with mevalonate
        abolished statin-activated shedding (see Figure 4). Statins block HMGCoA reductase
        generation of mevalonate from 3-hydroxy-methyl-glutarate (see Figure 7). Therefore, the
        addition of mevalonate would be predicted to antagonize statin action via the isoprenoid
        pathway, by relieving statin-induced mevalonate deficiency. As predicted by this model, we
        observed that statin-activated shedding was abolished by adding mevalonate. Taken together,
        these results suggest the existence of a reciprocal relationship between
        isoprenoid-mediated Rho/ROCK signaling and sAPP
        α shedding, i.e., activation of ROCK1 blocks basal and stimulated
        shedding while ROCK1 inhibition apparently relieves a tonic negative influence exerted on
        shedding by ROCK1 activity.
        As in PKC- and ERK-activated shedding, the ROCK1 substrate effector molecule or
        molecules that regulate proteolysis by ADAMs remain to be identified. The cytoplasmic
        domains of both APP and ADAM-17 have been evaluated as candidates for important targets of
        protein phosphorylation during the regulated shedding process, but neither “substrate
        activation” nor “enzyme activation” appears to explain the phenomenon, i.e.,
        phosphorylation of neither APP nor ADAM-17 dramatically increases the efficiency of
        α-secretion [61,62], indicating that activation is more indirect.
        Our data using statins and PO localize the mediator of statin-activated shedding to the
        plasma membrane, upstream of endocytosis, as appears to be the case for PKC-activated
        shedding [36,63,64,65]. Similar conclusions were drawn by Bosenberg and colleagues [36] who
        used streptolysin-porated cells and N-ethylmaleimide to demonstrate that reconstitution of
        activated shedding of TGFα from CHO cells does not require membrane trafficking and
        apparently occurs on the plasma membrane. These results suggest that a tightly
        membrane-associated regulatory subunit of the α-secretase complex is likely to be the key
        phosphoprotein that mediates α-secretase activity as a function of its state of
        phosphorylation by PKC and perhaps also ERK and ROCK1. The molecular identity of this
        phosphoprotein remains unknown.
        α-Secretase activation is a potential therapeutic strategy for modifying cerebral
        amyloidosis in Alzheimer disease [66]. This proposal is supported by recent evidence that
        either genetic modification of ADAM-10/α-secretase activity [67] or administration of
        bryostatin, a PKC activator [68], can modulate levels of brain Aβ in plaque-forming
        transgenic mice. α-Secretase activation may explain how statins lower the risk for
        Alzheimer disease [69], since atorvastatin diminishes Aβ burden in plaque-forming
        transgenic mice [13]. If α-secretase stimulation is to be truly viable as a human clinical
        intervention, it will be essential to assess the possibility that enhanced APP ectodomain
        shedding might incur mechanism-based toxicity (analogous to the concerns currently
        surrounding γ-secretase inhibitors). Along this line, extension of this work to other shed
        proteins will be important to determine the impact of enhanced shedding via ADAM
        proteinases on other substrates of those proteinases, including Notch, pro-TGFα, pro-TNFα,
        and CD44 [3].
        Preliminary results from a pilot proof-of-concept using atorvastatin in a human clinical
        treatment trial are consistent with the proposed beneficial effects of this class of
        compounds [70]. Since atorvastatin has low blood–brain barrier permeability [71], this
        beneficial effect, if attributable to Aβ lowering, must be due to altered Aβ metabolism in
        the periphery. Reduction in levels of free Aβ in the circulation has been demonstrated to
        lead to diminution in brain plaque burden following active or passive immunization [72]. It
        is conceivable that, if statins lower circulating Aβ, this effect could secondarily cause
        diffusion of central nervous system interstitial Aβ down its concentration gradient and
        into the cerebrospinal fluid and circulation, from which it is cleared. To date, however,
        this mechanism is not supported by data from human clinical trials, where statin
        administration has shown no consistent effect on levels of circulating or cerebrospinal
        fluid Aβ [73].
        The results reported here point to several areas for additional investigation. As
        described above, the key substrate or substrates linking cytoplasmic protein
        phosphorylation to intralumenal or cell-surface protelysis remain to be identified.
        Nonetheless, α-secretase activation has been validated as a viable therapeutic strategy for
        modulating cerebral amyloidosis [67]. Identification of the role of the Rho/ROCK pathway in
        regulating α-secretase provides a new avenue for its therapeutic activation, even though
        the potential relevance of atorvastatin-mediated ROCK1 inhibition in neurons may not
        explain the apparent clinical benefits of the drug. Still, if the reported
        disease-modifying effect of atorvastatin is confirmed in the National Institute on Aging's
        large, multi-center trial of simvastatin, one or more compounds of this class may be among
        the first disease-modifying compounds approved by the Food and Drug Administration for
        slowing the progression of Alzheimer disease.
      
      
        Supporting Information
        
          Accession Numbers
          The GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/) accession numbers for the proteins
          discussed in this paper are ROCK1 (NP_005397) and APP695, 595–596 KM/NL (NP_958817).
        
      
    
  
