
  
    
      
        Background
        Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) belongs to the
        Pneumovirinae subfamily of the Paramyxovirodae family of
        enveloped single-stranded negative sense RNA viruses. RSV
        infection of the lower respiratory tract cells results in
        cell death and sloughing into the lumen of the respiratory
        tree. Worldwide, RSV is the leading cause of infant
        mortality from respiratory infections and is so highly
        contagious that by age two nearly all children have been
        infected. RSV infection in infancy cause severe
        bronchiolitis and pneumonia and may predispose children to
        the subsequent development of asthma, the most common
        chronic illness of childhood [ 1 ] . Many studies have
        indicated that chemokines can play an important role in the
        onset and severity of asthma and it has been shown that RSV
        infection of lung epithelial cells increases chemokine
        production, although the mechanisms involved are largely
        unknown [ 2 3 4 5 ] .
        The chemotactic cytokines, or chemokines, compose a
        large superfamily of small structurally related
        polypeptides that play important roles in host defense by
        recruiting specific subsets of leukocytes to sites of
        inflammation and injury [ 6 ] . Chemokines have been
        associated with a number of inflammatory diseases and
        conditions, including asthma, sepsis, inflammatory bowel
        disease, and adult respiratory distress syndrome [ 7 8 9 ]
        . The chemokine superfamily can be divided into two major
        groups based on the position of the first two of
        four-conserved cysteine residues at the amino terminus,
        which are either adjacent (CC subfamily) or separated by
        one amino acid (CXC subfamily). The CXC chemokines such as
        IL-8 were originally identified as potent activators and
        chemoattractants for neutrophils, whereas the CC chemokines
        such as MCP-1 and RANTES mostly attract monocytes and
        eosinophils respectively [ 10 ] . Chemokines are secreted
        in a stimulus-and cell type-specific manner [ 11 12 13 14
        15 16 17 ] and are regulated primarily at the level of gene
        transcription [ 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 ] . The
        transcriptional promoters of IL-8, RANTES and MCP-1 contain
        binding sites for the redox-responsive transcription factor
        NF-κB, which has been shown to be important for their
        regulation by viral infections and cytokines [ 18 20 23 25
        26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 ] .
        We previously demonstrated that the chemokines IL-8,
        MCP-1 and RANTES are differentially regulated in A549
        airway epithelial cells [ 35 36 37 38 ] . To further
        elucidate the mechanisms of chemokine expression in A549,
        we have compared the induction of IL-8, MCP-1 and RANTES by
        RSV infection with that of TNFα. Our findings suggest that
        RSV induction of chemokine gene expression involves a
        redox-sensitive NF-κB signaling mechanism that differs from
        that mediated by TNFα and involving predominantly the Rel A
        subunit of NF-κB.
      
      
        Materials and methods
        
          Materials
          Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), fetal bovine
          serum (FBS), Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (DPBS),
          antibiotic/antimycotic, 1% trypsin/EDTA, Hanks Balanced
          Salt Solution (HBSS) and TRIZOL were purchased from
          Invitrogen Gibco Cell Culture (Carlsbad, CA).
          N-acetyl-L-cysteine, dexamethasone, glycerol and MTT
          tetrazolium salt were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis,
          MO). TNFα was obtained from R&D systems (Minneapolis,
          MN). ELISA kits were purchased from Pierce Endogen
          (Rockford, IL). Human CK5 RiboQuant ribonuclease
          protection assay kit was purchased from BD Pharmingen
          (San Diego, CA). [α- 32P]UTP (250 μCi) was obtained from
          Perkin Elmer Life Sciences (Boston, MA). Gel shift assay
          system was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). [γ-
          32P]ATP (500 μCi) was obtained from ICN (Costa Mesa, CA).
          Antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
          (Santa Cruz, CA). The A549 cell line and RSV Long strain
          were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
          (Rockville, MD).
        
        
          Virus stock growth and maintenance
          RSV, Long strain, was grown on HEp-2, a human tracheal
          epithelial cell line. Cells were grown to 50% confluence
          in DMEM containing 7% FBS and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic.
          After two washes with 1X DPBS, a minimal volume of RSV,
          at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 or greater,
          containing less than 1% FBS was added. The virus and
          cells were incubated for 2 hours, after which DMEM was
          added to bring culture to normal growth volume and 7%
          FBS. Cultures were then incubated for 48 hours. All
          plates were scraped and contents were transferred to 50
          ml conical tubes. The virus/cell cocktail was vortexed
          briefly and large debris was removed in a tabletop
          centrifuge. RSV was purified by ultracentrifugation
          through 30% glycerol in HBSS. RSV stocks were resuspended
          in HBSS containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin and 100 mM
          magnesium sulfate and frozen at -70° C.
        
        
          Cell culture, infection and treatments
          The A549 human type II lung carcinoma cell line was
          grown and maintained in DMEM containing 7% FBS and 1%
          antibiotic/antimycotic. For treatment, cells were grown
          to approximately 75% confluence, washed once with 1X DPBS
          and incubated overnight with DMEM containing 1% FBS.
          Cultures were then washed twice with 1X DPBS and
          pretreated with inhibitors DEX or NAC in serum-free DMEM
          to final concentrations as indicated in the figures. RSV
          and TNFα were added to the DMEM/inhibitor mix to final
          concentrations as indicated in the figures. One hour
          after agonist addition, FBS was added to 1% concentration
          for the duration of the experiment.
        
        
          Protein secretion
          After addition of RSV and TNFα, cells were cultured
          for 24 h. Supernatants were collected and spun at high
          speed to remove cellular debris. The resulting suspension
          was frozen at -70°C until assayed following
          manufacturer's instructions by chemokine-specific ELISA
          (Endogen).
        
        
          RNase protection
          RNase protection assays (RPA) were performed using an
          RPA kit purchased from BD Pharmingen. In brief, total RNA
          was isolated from stimulated A549 cells with TRIZOL. The
          hCK-5 multiprobe template set was used to synthesize RNA
          probes for the chemokines lymphotactin, RANTES, IP-10,
          MIP-1α, MIP-1β, IL-8, MCP-1, and I-309 as well as the
          house-keeping genes L32 and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
          dehydrogenase (GAPDH) labeled with [α- 32P]UTP using T7
          RNA polymerase. 3 × 10 5cpm of labeled probe were
          hybridized with 10 μg of total RNA for 16 h at 56°C.
          MRNA-probe hybrids were treated with RNase cocktail and
          phenol-chloroform extracted. Protected hybrids were
          resolved on a 6% denaturing polyacrylamide sequencing
          gels and exposed to a Molecular Dynamics detection screen
          overnight. Laser densitometry was performed using a
          Molecular Dynamics Storm scanner system (Molecular
          Dynamics, Inc., Sunny vale, CA).
        
        
          DNA binding studies
          Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) were
          performed essentially as described previously [ 39 ] .
          Briefly, nuclear protein extracts (7 μg protein) prepared
          form A549 cells by the method of Osborn 
          et al [ 40 ] were incubated with 5
          × 10 5cpm (~0.1 ng) of 32P end-labeled consensus NF-κB
          oligonucleotide (5'-AGTTGAGGGGACTTTCCCAGGC-3') probe
          contained in the Promega gel shift assay system for 20-30
          min at room temperature in 10 μl reaction volume using
          the kit provided reaction buffer. To demonstrate binding
          specificity, 100-fold molar excess (10 ng) of a specific
          or non-specific oligonucleotide
          (5'-ATTCGATCGGGGCGGGGCGAGC-3') was included in the
          binding reaction. Protein-DNA and protein-DNA-antibody
          complexes were resolved in 5% polyacrylamide gels
          preelectrophoresed for 30 min at room temperature in
          0.25X TBE buffer (22.5 mM Tris-borate and 0.5 mM EDTA, pH
          8.3). Gels were dried and exposed to radiographic film
          with an intensifying screen at -70°C.
        
        
          NF-kappaB subunit specific ELISA
          NF-κB subunits Rel A (p65) and NF-κB1 (p50) were
          quantified using Trans-AM™ transcription factor assay kit
          from Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA). The assay is
          essentially an ELISA in which the consensus NF-κB binding
          site (5'-GGGACTTTCC-3') is immobilized onto the 96 well
          plate. Nuclear cell extracts (3 μg) were added to the
          wells and assayed for either Rel A or p50 binding as per
          the manufacturer's instructions. Optical density was
          determined on a spectophotometer at 450 nm.
        
      
      
        Results
        
          RSV induction of chemokine expression differs from
          that induced by TNFalpha
          As shown in Fig. 1, RSV infection of A549 epithelial
          cells induces the production and secretion of the
          chemokines IL-8, MCP-1, and RANTES. In A549 epithelial
          cells substantial MCP-1 was constitutively expressed
          whereas little or no spontaneous IL-8 or RANTES was
          detected. However, upon RSV infection (MOI = 3) a
          significant increase in chemokine production and
          secretion was observed 24 hr post-infection for each of
          the chemokines.
          To determine whether the chemokine induction was
          mediated by increased chemokine gene expression we
          assessed the kinetics of mRNA synthesis by chemokine
          specific RNase protection. A549 cells were infected with
          RSV (MOI = 1) or stimulated with TNFα (100 ng/ml) and
          total RNA isolated at various times post-treatment over a
          24 hr time course. As shown in Fig. 2, RSV rapidly
          induced IL-8 and MCP-1 with steady-state mRNA readily
          detected as early as 1 hr and continued to increase over
          the 24 hr time course. In contrast, RANTES mRNA was not
          detected until 4 hrs post infection after which its
          expression rapidly increased also reaching a maximum at
          24 hrs. The RSV induction kinetics differed dramatically
          from the induction kinetics for TNFα in the same
          experiment. Whereas RSV induction of the chemokines did
          not reach a maximum until 24 hrs, TNFα induction was
          maximal between 4 and 8 hrs and was either unchanged or
          lower at 24 hrs post-infection.
          The magnitude of induction also differed between TNFα
          and RSV infection. In general TNFα was a stronger inducer
          of chemokine expression. This difference was also
          reflected in the amount of chemokine secreted from the
          cells (data not shown). Together, these data indicate
          that RSV infection of A549 epithelial cells induces
          chemokine expression with distinct kinetics suggesting
          the mechanism of RSV induction differs from that of
          proinflammatory cytokines.
        
        
          NF-kappaB inhibitors differentially effect RSV and
          TNFalpha induction of chemokine expression
          IL-8, MCP-1 and RANTES gene expression are regulated
          by the redox responsive transcription factor NF-κB [ 18
          20 23 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 41 42 43 44 ] . The
          NF-κB signaling pathways have been shown to be
          differentially affected by antioxidants and
          glucocorticoid steroids [ 45 ] . To determine whether RSV
          and TNFα induction of chemokine expression might be
          mediated by different NF-κB signaling pathways we
          pretreated A549 cells with the glutathione precursor
          N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) or the synthetic glucocorticoid
          dexamethasone (DEX). Twenty-four hours post infection,
          total RNA was isolated and steady state mRNA expression
          analyzed by chemokine specific RNase protection. As shown
          in Fig. 3, the two inhibitors had very different effects
          on chemokine gene expression. Most strikingly, RSV
          induced chemokine expression was more sensitive to NAC,
          whereas TNFα induced chemokine expression was conversely
          more sensitive to DEX. Thus, NAC preferentially inhibited
          chemokine expression induced by RSV, while DEX
          predominantly inhibited chemokine expression induced by
          TNFα.
        
        
          Differential inhibition of TNFalpha and RSV induced
          NF-kappaB
          NF-κB binds to the chemokine promoter as either homo-
          or heterodimers composed of Rel A (p65) and NF-κB1 (p50).
          Initially we detected TNFα and RSV induction of NF-κB by
          EMSA (KA Roebuck and LR Carpenter unpublished data) but
          because multiple gel shift complexes were induced it was
          not possible to distinguish the individual contributions
          of Rel A and p50 to the formation of these complexes.
          Therefore to assess the induction of the Rel A and p50
          subunits individually in A549 nuclear cell extracts, we
          used a subunit specific NF-κB binding ELISA system that
          utilizes anti-Rel A and anti-p50 antibodies. As shown in
          Fig. 4, Rel A and p50 subunits of NF-κB are
          differentially expressed and induced in A549 epithelial
          cells. In untreated cells, no Rel A (solid bars) was
          detectable whereas in resting cells constitutive levels
          of p50 were observed (open bars), suggesting that
          unstimulated A549 epithelial cells contain p50
          homodimers, which with regard to transcriptional activity
          have been shown to be functionally inert or inhibitory.
          In contrast, cells stimulated by TNFα (Fig. 4A) or
          infected by RSV (Fig. 4B) markedly induced Rel A, the
          transcriptionally active subunit of NF-κB. In addition,
          TNFα was also able to induce p50 by about 5-fold whereas
          RSV increased the constitutive p50 level by only about
          50%. The induction of Rel A and p50 were specific since
          competition with either wild type or mutant consensus
          NF-κB oligonucleotide respectively inhibited or not the
          RSV and TNFα induced binding activity. These data
          demonstrate that TNFα is a potent inducer of both Rel A
          and p50 whereas RSV primarily induces the Rel A subunit
          of NF-κB.
          To determine whether RSV and TNFα activate NF-κB
          differently, we examined the effects of NAC and DEX on
          Rel A and p50 binding activity. As shown in Fig. 4, Rel A
          and p50 subunits are differentially inhibited by NAC and
          DEX which have been shown to inhibit NF-κB by distinct
          mechanisms. Both NAC and DEX were unable to inhibit TNFα
          induction of either Rel A or p50. In contrast, in RSV
          infected cells both DEX and NAC inhibited Rel A and p50
          binding activity. However, the inhibitory effects were
          most striking for Rel A suggesting the inhibitors
          primarily target the RSV induction of Rel A.
          The differential effects of NAC on TNFα and RSV
          induced NF-κB binding activity correlated with its
          effects on chemokine gene expression (Fig. 3) and protein
          secretion (data not shown) suggesting that RSV induces
          IL-8, MCP-1 and RANTES through redox-sensitive NF-κB
          binding complexes. DEX also showed differential effects
          on NF-κB binding activity with DEX preferentially
          inhibiting RSV induction of NF-κB. However, the effects
          of DEX on NF-κB binding induced by TNFα did not correlate
          with its effects on chemokine expression, suggesting in
          TNFα activation of chemokine gene expression DEX targets
          another mechanism of chemokine induction not involving
          NF-κB.
        
      
      
        Discussion
        In this study, we examined the role of NF-κB in the
        activation of chemokine gene expression in response to TNFα
        and RSV infection. The inhibitor studies correlating
        chemokine gene expression and NF-κB binding activity
        indicate that RSV, in contrast to TNFα, induces IL-8, MCP-1
        and RANTES expression in A549 epithelial cells through a
        redox-sensitive NF-κB signaling pathway that appears to
        involve predominately Rel A. IL-8, MCP-1 and RANTES are
        known redox regulated genes and our results are consistent
        with the findings that oxidant tone can regulate chemokine
        gene expression in RSV infected airway epithelial cells [
        46 47 48 ] .
        NF-κB activation is controlled by its inhibitory protein
        I-κBα which when phosphorylated on ser32 and ser36 marks it
        for degradation by the 26S proteosome complex. Thus I-κB is
        a potential regulatory target for the differential
        induction of NF-κB. Although we have not directly examined
        the role of I-κB, Fiedler 
        et al [ 49 50 ] have reported
        differential effects of RSV and TNFα on I-κB activity in
        A549 epithelial cells. In addition, Bitko and Barik [ 51 ]
        have demonstrated that another I-κB protein (I-κBβ) may
        also contribute via a redox-sensitive pathway to NF-κB
        activation by RSV.
        In addition to NF-κB dependent regulation there appears
        to also be NF-κB independent activation of chemokine
        expression since DEX inhibited TNFα induced chemokine
        expression but not NF-κB binding activity. Along these
        lines, it has been shown that RSV activation of chemokine
        gene promoters involves multiple inducible transcription
        factors including AP-1 [ 52 53 ] , which is also a redox
        sensitive transcription factor important in chemokine gene
        expression [ 28 36 54 ] . AP-1 can also be inhibited by DEX
        and has been shown to cooperate with NF-κB to mediate RSV
        induction of IL-8 [ 46 55 ] .
        The differential effects of NAC and DEX on chemokine
        gene expression and NF-κB activation suggest that the
        mechanisms of RSV and TNFα activation of NF-κB and
        chemokine expression differ possibly involving distinct
        NF-κB signaling mechanisms. TNFα rapidly and potently
        activates Rel A and p50 subunits of NF-κB through a
        kinase-mediated phosphorylation cascade involving a high
        molecular mass signaling complex called the IKK complex [
        56 ] . TNFα activation of the multiprotein IKK complex
        results in the serine phorsphorylation of I-κB and the
        subsequent activation of NF-κB [ 57 ] .
        Consistent with the idea of RSV and TNFα activating
        distinct NF-κB signaling pathways, we found that the NF-κB
        inhibitor NAC had differential effects on chemokine gene
        expression. In contrast to TNFα, RSV induced chemokine
        expression was sensitive to NAC particularly the Rel A
        (p65) subunit. NAC is an antioxidant thiol that raises the
        intracellular pool of glutathione the major redox
        regulating mechanism in the A549 epithelial cell line [ 45
        ] . Interestingly, it has been reported that NAC can have
        differential effects on NF-κB binding activity suggesting
        only a subset of NF-κB binding complexes are redox
        sensitive [ 58 ] . Moreover, it has been shown that NAC
        inhibits Rel A/p50 heterodimers but not p50 homodimers and
        can inhibit NF-κB binding to only certain variant κB
        elements which presumably interact with distinct redox
        sensitive NF-κB binding complexes [ 59 ] . These
        observations are consistent with our findings that indicate
        NAC predominantly inhibits Rel A homodimers since that was
        the major NF-κB subunit induced by RSV infection of A549
        cells.
        Consistent with RSV and TNFα inducing functionally
        distinct NF-κB binding complexes, AP-1 was recently shown
        to be the preferential cooperative partner with NF-κB in
        RSV-induced IL-8 expression [ 46 ] , whereas in
        TNFα-induced expression NF-κB cooperates preferentially
        with NF-IL-6 [ 18 19 22 ] . Apparently, the
        stimulus-specific gene regulation of chemokines is complex
        involving differential cooperativity of redox sensitive and
        redox resistant NF-κB complexes with other transcription
        factors to form unique higher order transcription
        complexes.
      
      
        Conclusions
        Taken together, our data indicate that RSV, in contrast
        to the cytokine TNFα, activate NF-κB and chemokine gene
        expression through a redox sensitive NF-κB signaling
        pathway involving predominately Rel A.
      
      
        Competing interests
        None declared.
      
    
  
