
  
    
      
        Introduction
        Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β is a dimeric protein
        of 25 kDa molecular weight, originally isolated from
        platelets [ 1 2 ] . There are three distinct mammalian
        isoforms, TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and TGF-β3, with TGF-β1 being the
        most abundant isoform. Almost all cell types express TGF-β,
        but the highest level of expression of TGF-β is in
        platelets and bone [ 3 ] . Mature TGF-β1 consists of two
        identical peptide chains, each containing 112 amino acids,
        linked via nine disulfide bonds [ 4 ] . TGF-β1 is
        synthesized as part of a large, latent protein complex,
        unable to bind to cellular receptors, with mature active
        TGF-β1 produced by cleavage [ 5 ] .
        TGF-β1 is a mutifunctional cytokine that plays an
        important role in immunomodulation, inflammation and tissue
        repair [ 6 ] . Many studies have suggested that TGF-β could
        be a potential therapeutic reagent for the repair of soft
        tissue and bone, and following ischemic injury. It may also
        have applications for the treatment of chronic inflammatory
        fibrotic and autoimmune diseases [ 7 8 ] . In contrast,
        other studies have demonstrated that TGF-β1 can cause
        inflammation and fibrosis [ 9 10 ] . The potential use of
        TGF-β1 for the treatment of human disease thus remains
        controversial [ 11 ] .
        Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic, autoimmune disease.
        It is characterized by a chronic, erosive inflammation of
        painful and debilitating joints, with progressive
        degradation of cartilage and bone accompanied by
        proliferation of the synovium [ 12 ] . Rheumatoid arthritis
        remains incurable and, in many patients, difficult to
        treat. As a novel approach to therapy, we and other workers
        have focused on developing the methods for local transfer
        of genes encoding therapeutic agents to the joint [ 13 14
        15 16 17 18 19 ] . This strategy also can be applied to the
        treatment of osteoarthritis and for aiding the repair of
        the cartilage and other intra-articular tissues.
        Since TGF-β1 has anti-inflammatory properties as well as
        being able to stimulate new matrix synthesis by
        chondrocytes, it represents a possible therapeutic agent
        with which to treat pathologies associated with rheumatoid
        arthritis and osteoarthritis by local gene delivery. Other
        workers and ourselves have previously examined the effects
        of TGF-β1 gene transfer on matrix synthesis in chondrocyte
        cultures, demonstrating a significant stimulation in the
        production of proteoglycans [ 9 ] . In addition, we have
        demonstrated that the TGF-β1 gene was able to overcome the
        inhibitory effects of IL-1β on matrix metabolism in
        chondrocytes in culture [ 20 ] .
        To examine the effect of TGF-β1 on joint pathology, we
        used adenovirus-mediated intra-articular gene delivery to
        confer sustained, intra-articular TGF-β1 expression in both
        naïve and arthritic rabbit knee joints. Intra-articular
        injection of adenoviral vector expressing human
        transforming growth factor (Ad.TGF)-β1 resulted in a high
        level of TGF-β1 accumulation in the synovial fluid.
        Intra-articular TGF-β1 expression was anti-inflammatory,
        inhibiting white blood cells. However, TGF-β1 expression
        also induced significant pathology in the rabbit knee as
        well as in the adjacent muscle, including stimulation of
        glycosaminoglycan (GAG) release and nitric oxide synthesis,
        and enhancement of fibrogenesis and muscle edema. These
        results suggest that, although TGF-β1 may have
        anti-inflammatory effects, sustained expression of TGF-β1
        has adverse effects on joint pathology.
      
      
        Materials and methods
        
          Vector construction
          The recombinant adenoviral vector used in the present
          study originates from replication-deficient type 5
          adenovirus lacking E1 and E3 loci [ 21 ] . The human
          TGF-β1 cDNA was inserted in place of the E1 region in the
          shuttle plasmid pAd-Lox [ 22 ] , where expression is
          driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter.
          The recombinant Ad.TGF-β1 virus was generated by
          Cre-Lox-driven recombination in Cre 8 cells [ 22 ] .
          Briefly, a confluent 10 cm 2dish of Cre 8 cells (1.6 × 10
          7) was split into five 6 cm 2dishes. Transfection of
          these cells with pAd-Lox-human TGF-β1 was performed by
          the calcium phosphate precipitation method with 3 μg
          pAd-Lox-human TGF-β1 construct digested with 
          Sfi I and 3 μg ψ5 helper virus DNA.
          The transfected Cre 8 cells were fed daily until there
          were visible plaques. The cells were harvested and
          exposed to three cycles of freeze/thaw. The recombinant
          virus was purified and amplified by infecting two 10 cm
          dishes of Cre 8 cells using 100 μl lysate. The Ad.TGF-β1
          virus was purified using cesium chloride gradient
          ultracentrifugation at 154,000 
          g (30,000 rpm) and 4°C, and then
          dialyzed three times against Tris-buffered saline.
          The titer was determined by measuring the viral DNA at
          optical density 260 nm (OD 
          260 nm ) using the formula: viral
          particles = OD 
          260 nm × dilution / 9.09 × 10 -13. The
          adenovirus expressing luciferase was kindly provided by J
          Kolls (LSU Medical Center, New Orleans, LA, USA).
        
        
          Animals and experimental arthritis
          New Zealand white rabbits, weighing 4-5 kg, were
          purchased from Myrtles Rabbitry (Thompson Station, TN,
          USA). To establish antigen-induced arthritis (AIA),
          rabbits were sensitized to ovalbumin by intradermal
          injections of 5 mg ovalbumin emulsified in Freund's
          complete adjuvant. Arthritis was initiated in both hind
          knees of rabbits 3 weeks later by the intra-articular
          injection of 5 mg ovalbumin dissolved in 0.5 ml Gey's
          saline. The different adenoviral vectors were injected
          intra-articularly 24 hours after injection of
          antigen.
        
        
          Experimental protocol
          Twenty-four hours after induction of AIA, adenoviral
          particles encoding either the human TGF-β1 or luciferase
          were suspended in 0.2 ml Gey's saline and injected into
          the joint space of the knee through the patellar tendon.
          Different doses of virus (1 × 10 7, 1 × 10 8and 1 × 10 9)
          viral particles were injected intra-articularly into
          three rabbits per group for analysis of the effects of
          TGF-β1 on naïve joint pathology, and the treated rabbits
          were sacrificed 7 days postinfection to observe the
          dose-response effects. Another group of three naïve
          rabbits was injected with 1 × 10 9viral particles and
          sacrificed 17 days postinfection for long-term
          observation.
          There were two groups of AIA rabbits used in the
          study. The first group of three rabbits was injected with
          1 × 10 8viral particles, and the second group of six
          rabbits was injected with 1 × 10 9viral particles. Each
          rabbit received the indicated dose of TGF-β1 virus in one
          knee and the same amount of the adenoviral vector
          expressing luciferase (Ad.Luc) virus in the opposite knee
          as the control.
          To lavage the rabbit knee joints, 1 ml Gey's saline
          was injected into the joint space through the patellar
          tendon. After manipulation of the joint, the needle was
          reinserted and the fluid was aspirated. Leukocytes in
          recovered lavage fluids were counted using a
          hemocytometer. The levels of TGF-β1 in conditioned media,
          lavage fluids and sera were measured using an ELISA kit
          (R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) as directed by
          the supplier. The levels of sulfated GAGs in lavage
          fluids were determined using a colorimetric dye-binding
          assay using 1,9-dimethylmethylene blue [ 23 ] . The
          levels of total nitrite in lavage fluids were measured
          with Nitric Oxide Assay kits (Calbiochem ®; Biosciences
          Inc, La Jolla, CA, USA).
          Articular cartilage fragments shaved from the femoral
          condyles were placed into 1 ml Neuman-Tyell serum-free
          medium (Gibco, New York, USA) to measure the rate of
          proteoglycan synthesis. The fragments were then incubated
          with 35SO 
          4 2-(20 μCi) for 24 hours at 37°C, and
          the media harvested and stored at -20°C. Proteoglycans
          were extracted from the cartilage by incubation for 48
          hours in 1 ml of 0.5 M NaOH at 4°C with gentle agitation.
          Following chromatographic separation of unincorporated
          35SO 
          4 2-using PD-10 columns (Pharmacia,
          Uppsala, Sweden), the levels of radiolabeled GAGs
          released onto the culture media or recovered by alkaline
          extraction were quantitated by scintillation counting [
          24 ] .
        
        
          Histology
          For histological analyses, tissues harvested from
          dissected knees were first fixed in 10% formalin. The
          fixed tissues were imbedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5
          μm, and stained with H & E.
        
        
          Statistical analysis
          All data collected are expressed as mean ± standard
          error. Statistical significance was analyzed by analysis
          of variance and Student's 
          t test. Correlation coefficients ( 
          r ) were calculated using Pearson's
          method.
        
      
      
        Results
        
          Expression of TGF-β1 after intra-articular
          injection of Ad.TGF-β1
          To test the effects of adenoviral-mediated human
          TGF-β1 gene expression in naïve and AIA rabbit joints, 1
          × 10 7, 1 × 10 8and 1 × 10 9particles of Ad.TGF-β1 were
          injected into either naïve or arthritic rabbit knees. The
          same amounts of Ad.Luc were injected into the
          contralateral knees. Lavages were performed on day 3, day
          7 and day 17, and the levels of TGF-β1 were determined by
          ELISA (Fig. 1).
          TGF-β1 expression was detected in all knee joints
          receiving either 1 × 10 8or 1 × 10 9viral particles, with
          higher levels detected in the arthritic knees. A
          significant drop in TGF-β1 expression was observed after
          17 days of post-viral injection. No significant levels of
          TGF-β1 were detected in the 1 × 10 7viral particle
          injection group and in the contralateral joints receiving
          the different doses of luciferase virus. Furthermore, no
          significant expression of TGF-β was detected in the
          serum.
          It is important to note that detection of TGF-β1 in
          the synovial fluid required acid activation, suggesting
          that the protein is in its latent form. Moreover, there
          were no observed therapeutic or adverse effects following
          intra-articular injection of the low dose (1 × 10
          7particles) of Ad.TGF-β1.
        
        
          Alterations in joint anatomy after intra-articular
          Ad.TGF-β1 injection
          Three days after injection of Ad.TGF-β1, the knees
          receiving the highest dose of virus became enlarged with
          a reduction in joint movement. In addition, the muscles
          adjacent to the joints showed signs of swelling and
          reduced movement. The animals were sacrificed on day 7
          post-injection, and the joints were analyzed. The size of
          the joints and the adjacent muscles increased
          dramatically both in naïve rabbits (1.5 × contralateral
          knees, 
          P < 0.05) and in AIA rabbits
          (1.25 × contralateral knees, 
          P < 0.01) (Fig. 2).
          The movement of joints was also severely limited, with
          the Ad.Luc contralateral knees moving freely at 180°
          whereas the knees treated with Ad.TGF-β1 virus could only
          move at 90-120°. The limitation to joint movement was not
          due to the enlarged muscles since, when the muscles were
          cut away, the limitation of movement was still observed.
          In addition, when the joints were analyzed 17 days after
          viral injection, at a time when the muscle size returned
          to normal, the joint still could not move freely. The
          limitation to joint movement could thus be due to
          possible synovial hyperplasia or effects on ligaments or
          cartilage metabolism.
          It is important to note that we did observe an
          increase in creatine kinase levels in the serum that
          would suggest muscle damage (data not shown). In contrast
          to the high-dose TGF-β1 group, only a very mild effect
          was observed on the gross joint structure in the group
          receiving 1 × 10 8viruses and no changes were observed in
          the group receiving 1 × 10 7viruses.
        
        
          Effect of TGF-β1 on cartilage metabolism
          To determine whether overexpression of TGF-β1 had
          effects on cartilage metabolism in naïve and AIA rabbit
          joints, GAG synthesis by articular cartilage and GAGs
          released into synovial fluid as a result of proteoglycan
          breakdown were measured. The rabbit joints receiving
          Ad.TGF-β1 had significant higher levels of GAG release,
          compared with the contralateral Ad.Luc joints, in lavage
          fluids at day 3, day 7 and day 17 for the naïve rabbits
          and at day 7 for the AIA rabbits (Fig. 3A,3B,3C). GAG
          release levels correlated linearly with the levels of
          TGF-β1 in lavage fluids ( 
          r = 0.937) in the naïve rabbits. In
          addition, only the highest dose of Ad.TGF-β1 was able to
          stimulate GAG synthesis in the naïve rabbit joints from
          day 7 and day 17, but the stimulation was marginal. There
          was no statistically significant difference between GAG
          synthesis by the naïve rabbits with the two lower doses
          of viral injections and in the AIA rabbits (Fig.
          3D,3E,3F).
          Taken together, these results suggest that
          intra-articular expression of TGF-β1 stimulated cartilage
          matrix degradation while having only a minor effect on
          the promotion of new matrix synthesis. This is in
          contrast to the results observed on matrix synthesis in
          chondrocytes in culture, where TGF-β1 was able to
          stimulate significant new matrix synthesis as well as
          overcome the suppressive effects of IL-1β on matrix
          metabolism [ 21 25 ] .
        
        
          Inhibition of white blood cell infiltration and
          elevation of nitric oxide synthesis
          To determine whether TGF-β1 expression could inhibit
          the mild inflammation induced by intra-articular
          injection of high doses of adenovirus or the severe
          inflammation occurring in the AIA model, the levels of
          white blood leukocytic infiltrate in the synovial lavage
          fluids were determined (Fig. 4).
          The joints of naïve rabbits receiving the highest dose
          of Ad.TGF-β1 adenovirus had significantly lower levels of
          white blood cell infiltration in lavage fluids at day 3,
          day 7 and day 17. The white blood cell infiltration in
          the naïve joints directly correlated with TGF-β1
          expression levels in the lavage fluids ( 
          r = 0.954). In the AIA rabbit knee
          joints, there was a reduction in the infiltration at day
          3 and day 7 compared with the contralateral control
          Ad.Luc joints, consistent with TGF-β1 having an
          anti-inflammatory effect. Surprisingly, TGF-β1 expression
          elevated nitrate levels in the joints receiving high-dose
          injections of TGF-β1 adenovirus at day 3, day 7 and day
          17 for naïve rabbits and at day 7 for the AIA rabbits,
          compared with the control joints (Fig. 4D,4E,4F). The
          nitrate levels also directly correlated with the levels
          of TGF-β1 in lavage fluids ( 
          r = 0.945) for naïve rabbits.
          These results suggested that TGF-β1 is indeed
          anti-inflammatory in arthritic knees, but is able to
          induce production of nitric oxide through an unknown
          mechanism.
        
        
          Histological analysis of the intra-articular
          effects of TGF-β1
          The naïve and AIA rabbit knee joints receiving
          Ad.TGF-β1 and Ad.Luc were also examined by histology.
          There was significant fibroblast proliferation around the
          myofibers in the naïve rabbits joint receiving Ad.TGF-β1.
          There was also mild hyperplasia of the synovial lining,
          but without any evidence of inflammatory cells being
          observed (Fig. 5A,5B). There were some inflammatory cells
          in the contralateral synovial lining, but no evidence of
          synovitis (Fig. 5C,5D). The synovium from the TGF-β1
          virus treated joints was highly fibrotic 17 days after
          viral injection, with evidence of osteometroplasia found
          in the synovium (Fig. 5E,5F) but with no evidence of
          inflammation or angiogenesis (Fig. 5F).
          There was mild inflammation under the synovium in the
          contralateral joints receiving Ad.Luc (Fig. 5G,5H). The
          synovium in the Ad.TGF-β1-treated AIA rabbits showed
          evidence of hyperproliferation with mild inflammation
          (Fig. 5I,5J), compared with the contralateral control
          joints that had severe inflammation (Fig. 5K,5L). In the
          muscle tissue adjacent to Ad.TGF-β1-treated joints, there
          was evidence of both fibroblast and myofibroblast
          proliferation between myofibers with intracellular edema,
          but there was no evidence of inflammation or myonecrosis
          (Fig. 5M,5N). In contrast, the muscle tissue from the
          contralateral controls knees was normal (Fig. 5O,5P).
          There was also mild fibroblast proliferation and synovial
          inflammation in the 1 × 10 8Ad.TGF-β group, but no
          significant histological changes were observed in the 1 ×
          10 7viral group.
          These data taken together suggest that TGF-β1 is able
          to stimulate fibrogenesis and to suppress inflammation.
          Moreover, the results suggest that elevated TGF-β1 levels
          result in chondrogenesis within the synovial tissue.
        
      
      
        Discussion
        TGF-β1 is a mutifunctional cytokine that plays an
        important role in immunomodulation, inflammation and tissue
        repair. Given that TGF-β1 is able to induce new matrix
        synthesis from chondrocytes in culture as well as able to
        block inflammation 
        in vivo , it has been proposed that
        local intra-articular gene transfer of TGF-β1 could be
        therapeutic for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis as
        well as osteoarthritis. To examine the effects of TGF-β1 on
        joint pathology, we used adenovirus-mediated
        intra-articular gene delivery to confer sustained
        intra-articular TGF-β1 expression in both naïve and
        arthritic rabbit knee joints. Intra-articular injection of
        Ad.TGF-β1 virus into the rabbit knee resulted in
        dose-dependent elevated levels of expression of TGF-β1 in
        the synovial fluid, but not in the serum.
        Intra-articular TGF-β1 expression resulted in
        dose-dependent biological effects in the rabbit knee as
        well as in adjacent muscle. In particular, local
        intra-articular expression in naïve joints stimulated
        cartilage breakdown, as measured by synovial GAG levels,
        without enhancing new matrix synthesis. In addition, TGF-β1
        expression stimulated nitric oxide production. Similarly,
        in arthritic joints where TGF-β1 expression inhibited white
        blood cell infiltration, it also stimulated GAG release and
        nitric oxide production. Although there was a reduction in
        inflammation in arthritic joints, TGF-β1 expression induced
        fibrogenesis and muscle edema. In addition, TGF-β1
        expression in the adenovirally infected synovial lining
        also resulted in induction of chondrogenesis in the
        synovium. Elevated TGF-β1 expression in the synovial fluid
        thus resulted in a variety of adverse pathological
        changes.
        A previous study examined the effect of Ad.TGF-β1 in the
        knee joints of naïve C57/Bl/6 mice where gene transfer of
        TGF-β1 to the mouse knee resulted in hyperplasia of the
        synovium as well as in chondro-osteophyte formation at the
        chondrosynovial junctions [ 10 ] . The present experiments
        have shown similar effects on synovial proliferation, but
        also have extended the murine studies to examine the
        effects of TGF-β1 in both diseased knee joints and normal
        knee joints in the rabbit. Similar to the previous report,
        we have observed evidence for intra-synovial chondrogenesis
        as well as osteometroplasia following TGF-β1 gene transfer.
        Whether TGF-β1 directly or indirectly stimulates
        proliferation of synovium is unclear, but this pathology
        apparently is mediated through an IL-1β-independent
        mechanism.
        It has been speculated that intra-articular delivery of
        TGF-β1 would result in enhanced synthesis of new matrix [ 9
        ] . Indeed, we have reported previously that the TGF-β1
        gene is more effective than insulin-like growth factor type
        1 and bone morphogenetic protein type 2 genes in
        stimulating new matrix synthesis from rabbit chondrocytes
        in culture. We have also demonstrated that TGF-β1 is able
        to partially overcome the inhibition of new matrix
        synthesis by IL-1β in cultured chondrocytes. The results
        presented in the present article, however, suggest that
        TGF-β1 expression is unable to enhance new matrix synthesis
        
        in vivo in either naïve joints or, in
        particular, in diseased joints. Moreover, it appears as if
        TGF-β1 confers adverse effects by stimulating cartilage
        degradation through an unknown mechanism. In contrast to
        the adverse effects of intra-articular adenoviral gene
        transfer of TGF-β1, we have shown that gene transfer of
        insulin-like growth factor type 1 to the rabbit knee
        results in an increase in new matrix synthesis without any
        adverse effects [ 17 ] .
        Taken together, these results suggest that increasing
        the intra-articular levels of TGF-β1 has no therapeutic
        effect on cartilage metabolism, resulting instead in higher
        rates in cartilage degradation. Use of the synovium as a
        target tissue for TGF-β1 gene transfer, resulting in
        elevating the intra-articular level, is thus not
        appropriate for the enhancement of repair of cartilage
        defects. Instead, for TGF-β1 gene therapy to be effective
        in promoting repair of damaged cartilage, the level of
        TGF-β1 will need to be highly regulated as well as
        expression localized. TGF-β1 expression would need to be
        targeted, at the appropriate levels, to the site of
        cartilage damage, such as through gene transfer to
        chondrocytes or stem cells involved in repairing the
        damaged tissues.
        TGF-β1 has been shown to be therapeutic in several
        different animal models when expressed systemically from
        muscle tissue [ 26 27 ] . This suggests that elevated serum
        levels of TGF-β1 can reduce general inflammation as well as
        inhibit IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor alpha production,
        resulting in a systemic therapeutic effect. In addition,
        TGF-β1 has been shown to be therapeutic in murine models of
        collagen-induced arthritis following delivery in
        genetically modified T cells [ 28 ] . This observation
        suggests that targeting TGF-β1 to certain sites of
        inflammation through the use of arthogenic T cells also can
        be therapeutic. However, our results suggest that local
        expression of TGF-β1, unlike systemic expression, is not
        therapeutic due to adverse pathologies associated with
        elevated intra-articular TGF-β1 expression.
        Although our results do not preclude the development of
        gene therapy approaches to express regulated TGF-β1
        systemically to downmodulate the immune response, the
        results suggest that any clinical application of local
        TGF-β1 gene transfer should proceed with caution. TGF-β1 is
        clearly a potent cytokine, able to confer multiple effects
        when expressed intra-articularly 
        in vivo .
      
      
        Conclusion
        Gene transfer represents a novel method for obtaining
        high intra-articular levels of therapeutic agents for the
        treatment of arthritis. TGF-β1 is able to stimulate new
        matrix synthesis by chondrocytes in culture as well as able
        to reduce inflammation 
        in vivo . In this report, the effects
        of intra-articular expression on both naïve and arthritic
        rabbit knee joint pathology were examined by
        adenoviral-mediated intra-articular gene transfer of
        TGF-β1. The results suggest that elevated TGF-β1 expression
        confers adverse joint pathology including an increase in
        cartilage matrix degradation without stimulating new matrix
        synthesis. In addition, TGF-β expression induces muscle
        edema and fibrogenesis.
        Although TGF-β1 may have certain anti-inflammatory
        properties, it is unable to stimulate repair of damaged
        cartilage, and even stimulates cartilage degradation.
        Moreover, elevated TGF-β1 expression also induced muscle
        edema and fibrogenesis. Gene transfer of TGF-β1 to the
        synovium is thus not suitable for treating intra-articular
        pathologies, such as the repair of damaged cartilage,
        associated with rheumatoid arthritis and
        osteoarthritis.
      
      
        Competing interests
        None declared.
      
      
        Abbreviations
        Ad.Luc = adenoviral vector expressing luciferase; Ad.TGF
        = adenoviral vector expressing human transforming growth
        factor; AIA = antigen-induced arthritis; ELISA =
        enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; GAG = glycosaminoglycan;
        H & E = hematoxylin and eosin; IL = interleukin; TGF =
        transforming growth factor.
      
    
  
